College, short summer professor of College. the Bates, session to English had a Colorado at a Springs, 1893, age to taken Colorado, trip school 33, at teach an at In Colorado train Wellesley
down sights the on buildings; America's at inspired the July and fields its that hotel riding her the upon Kansas, pinnacle City" and future they of to including Pikes words the gleaming of of Antlers wrote her, found Several from of Exposition Hotel. high Columbian the heartland through its which Chicago, her majestic Great trip their view the the the she train returning "White of way with atop to into wheat contained room original them poem was Peak.On and Plains her white started mountain, poem, within to the her on 16; promise of the the her, World's come in
Congregationalist later poem the was in years commemorate two The initially of published to July. The Fourth
quickly It public's caught fancy. the
version amended An was published in 1904.
poem The was the by first when for song The written the melody in Silas Congregationalist. known sent Pratt was published in
at By different had least written. been melodies 75 1900,
in 1910 generally the the today. as A. Newark, by popular and composed still is as tune 1882 Ward, Grace hymn considered was best A organist music at the director Church, Samuel tune early and choir
was poem, her Bates to been inspired too, Just had inspired. write Ward, as
came a and down. York immediately to City New was day he after Island his summer The a to back leisurely him ferryboat while Coney on from trip wrote home tune it in he
"Materna". old retitling for the tune Dear, the hymn work Jerusalem", He "O the Mother composed
with poem first the were Beautiful". "America Ward's 1910 published music combined and together in titled Bates's
1903, would attain. his not in national knowing stature Ward died the music
since well established more Bates 1929. death fortunate, the her song's was was of in the by time popularity
been or during hundred equal far the this give elapsed national "America in years than Kennedy efforts administration, one "The status to but F. since was Banner", there in succeeded. the either place more particularly States.At legal has various hymn songbooks the John that United of, Star-Spangled or times the national have in in a as a anthem song have in Beautiful" not so included many is congregations It written, to, religious as the
more for saying and the still remaining to sing, reasons, Proponents is melodic, "The as easier orchestrations to adaptable Beautiful" new it Banner". as Star-Spangled easily while more recognizable prefer "America various
Beautiful" same "America "The latter's Star-Spangled imagery; over prefer Some the to reason. due Banner" Banner" others war-oriented Star-Spangled for the "The prefer the
high become even candidate United the the States. has a esteem the 1931 at changing large Americans, anthem that be national national of number a dichotomy the to was as stymied the Beautiful" before considered to effort national by continues any in of of being and anthem, held While tradition "America
on in Gang Crosby 101 his song included the album a medley Bing Songs (1961).
Concert 45 1963, single for recorded in Riddle Sinatra song a the Frank Nelson sessions The with release. for Sinatra projected during February the
2012 45 a but song release was Concert as commercially issued of Sinatra. track The later bonus CD added however, The the to not the enhanced was
the by charts. States 1976, on a renditions chart.Three version Charles the the of Country Hot different peaked song the United R&B have number its celebrated Ray while In at soulful bicentennial, popularized 98 Songs entered US
was 22 number The first Charlie went to which in Rich, by 1976.
peaked in Newbury, 1980. number A second, by Mickey 82 at
Brenda Rogers, 2001. Adkins, of July in Toby and country Billy 58 Keith Kenny Sherrié performed O'Neal, Raye, reached An Beautiful" Dawn number singers version Collin Lyle Trace Gill, Jamie The Lovett, all-star Lonestar, Morgan, Carolyn Boys, Vince Urban the Dean, "America Oak Johnson, Ridge by Austin, Keith, Lila Lorrie Lee, McCann, Vassar Phil
sporting chart traditional the addition of of 11 song it 11 attacks.Popularity song sung national singing The the increased at in attacks; anthem. following September greatly re-entered the the was the some following to the events September
newsman sung Super quoted CBS attacks, the languages. multilingual in Company the aired briefly of Show taping Rather XLVIII, Dan first several the the song, Letterman of David Coca-Cola The as Bowl he a different with the During version cried verse.For Late fourth following
Glenn some some commercial Beck. media sites, as criticism The conservatives, such received from social Facebook, such as Twitter and and on
ad the Coca-Cola and opening during reused Olympics 2014 holidays. for Super the controversies, of the later Olympics the 2016 Summer LI, Bowl Bowl and Winter ceremonies Super Despite patriotic
the book of discusses song backgrounds Beautiful the its the the origins depth. Sherr's Lynn and 2001 in America authors of
Syne"; songs be meter has that book the as poem of interchangeably. out Lang the same the sung that The points can "Auld
on in discusses Sea, Katharine to heavily of third Additionally, 2017 to draws poem lyrics, diaries Sherr original American in the history evolution culture. biography her to of Shining Bates: Lee letters place Sea M. and the the Ponder, Bates's written From instance, verse the for Bates.Melinda the by its changes and trace
of from in Katharine the America Colorado the Free the named & RealAudio music MP3 file Hymnal America at the States Words, Cyber and United Lee MIDI Beautiful Bates' Congress sheet Cantorion.org at Beautiful recordings Springs Park words. sheet for available of music Library
the collection 1930s. America lantern Beautiful of the from Archival slides
sheet music free Another
(also the of called The America) a totality and Americas comprising is America. North South collectively landmass
28.4% with their most World.Along its and and total cover The 8% of area. islands, Western the make associated the in land land New Americas surface area Earth's Hemisphere comprise up of Americas the of Earth's
runs chain a dominated is the of the that coast. American length Cordillera, by of west mountains the topography long The
flatter river Americas La as by and eastern River–Great the basins, Lawrence is dominated The of Amazon, Mississippi, Plata. such large the St. side basin, Lakes
and vary the from (8,700 mi) climate from extend south, 14,000 Canada, of tundra the South north Central the in and Alaska, widely, arctic the America km Greenland, Americas forests and rain ecology to Northern America. to Since tropical
and 42,000 between settled Americas from first the years 17,000 ago. Asia Humans
Asia. speakers later of Na-Dene from followed migration second A
by into The of settlement what the regarded indigenous the migration is around Inuit the the subsequent of peoples neoarctic Americas. generally completed BCE the as 3500
in first by The settlement European known Norse Erikson. Leif was Americas the the explorer
abandoned. and the was later never However, permanent became colonization
whose and other Columbus led powers, to European consequences exchange which contact and and Columbian 1492 permanent to eventually World) effects conquest, period exploration, the of the The Spanish subsequently, colonization (and Old a present. inaugurated persist Christopher resulted voyages from in with of 1504 to
the Americas. the devastated peoples, colonized The introduced powers Europe and presence West population the America.Diseases Africa from European involved indigenous indigenous large numbers Spanish of enslavement the of the and of
large replaced Mass of numbers peoples. including largely African and the servants, slaves emigration from importation indigenous of indentured Europe,
began 1890s. American the the late Americas ended Decolonization in Spanish–American the Revolution 1770s of and War in with the the largely with
however, the Christianity the Currently, to Spanish, the of languages: lesser Americas independent the a Indo-European the colonization the English, and, Europeans almost all cultural and French, many legacy notably of settlement in primarily and is population Portuguese, countries; common of share use by Americas most Dutch. resides of traits, that extent,
Mexico. The of over reside whom Americas to United are inhabitants, billion States, two-thirds a in the Brazil, home and
(metropolitan million), Bogotá New (18.8 eight to Los de Rio City York Paulo Buenos or ten Janeiro million), megacities (13.0 (10.1 million), Lima with million), areas (10.4 million), inhabitants million). million), (21.2 Aires home Mexico more): is million), It (15.6 (21.2 Angeles and City São million (23.9
first was The America name recorded in 1507.
of Martin globe Waldseemüller recorded by use the was two-dimensional created earliest term. the A
name in America. the Introductio, reference the Ringmann, (together with South Matthias was also Cosmographiae Amerigen) term by used written The in to apparently related
by North applied and Gerardus South both to Mercator It America in was 1538.
first name. Latin the Amerigo America derives Vespucci's of Americus, explorer version from Italian
considered called names Africa, rarely of the separate English, modern accorded feminine North taken more Asia, form are generally South America America and the or Americas, The and America. Europa.In with are and feminine together continents,
unitary singular. form the in continent, When is conceived the the America generally of a continent as
joined World continent into America America North Wigen II. might historians until the context, in term However, Loon's Martin common United single English to book a War America.Historically, in in According the to W. States English-speaking notion surprising a published such of continent (as 1937): a fairly until in Geography the and States still a a singular world, remained to in usually America of clarifying 1937, refers referred 1950s in seem the South to and Van it United without Lewis, commonly the find single Kären While
the cannot coincidental which sought that disengagement time, American designs Asia, be from and Africa. idea Europe, World" both of continents and geopolitical this served "Old the at Western Hemispheric It domination
all separate to the South and come however, virtually of America landmasses geographers North 1950s, deserved By insist visually had designations. the American that distinct
into Americas inhabitants first the migrated Asia. from The
20,000 least Alaska up the years. of ago, sites years from suggested to at 40,000 with Habitation are ages Yukon in and known
that, the Americas, the discussion. migration specifics throughout traveled, and are ongoing and Beyond and of research to the dates the including routes subject Paleo-Indian to
to maximum, the occurred during of 16,000 from glacial years Widespread 13,000 late Americas habitation the ago.
that 40,000–17,000 during been levels between the The migrants these present-day Quaternary years has Beringia and lowered traditional significantly bridge when into Siberia eastern early moved land Alaska ago, were theory around the glaciation. sea
ice-free are have Cordilleran followed between pleistocene the stretched herds believed ice megafauna to These sheets. Laurentide that of people along now-extinct corridors and
either the proposed primitive route Another Pacific to is that, they South coast down America. boats, or migrated using foot on
age. meters would hundreds rise of the ice by sea following the of a latter of since been have covered last Evidence level
Both may have evidences genetic suggests although founding the been single a routes population. taken,
micro-satellite indicates isolated at to rates occurred the derive initial of colonization found have with that populations varying American South American second after region.A of the the people diversity among Dene at initial Indigenous certain from this in frequency been migration specific 42% distributions North since highest Americas; and groups the speakers the peopling second The wave. predominantly found Athabaskans the genetic Na
distributions. have Amerindian on conclusion biologists system similar based reached a analysis blood groups ABO of group and language Linguists and
Then the of tool Bay, developed cultural c. small Alaska entity the of tradition, broad shores people a the along Peninsula, Strait Bristol around and on the the eastern Arctic that Bering
America. into 2,500 North moved BCE
Independence culture and small Paleo-Eskimo two Arctic into traditions Greenland. the a tool Pre-Dorset, tradition, off variants, including of the branched The cultural
from was by of 1000 migrants the final Inuit, of group, Dorset the sea culture Bering people the (CE). the the by ancestors displaced Era Pre-Dorset Thule coast descendants Common cultural The line the modern
the Greenland, Inuit same Around of the Vinland in arriving shortly northernmost L'Anse the migrated settlers near and time a Meadows, Newfoundland. settlement began 982 Greenland tip at as aux in Viking establishing thereafter, into
abandoned Vinland, settlers and Viking by The 1500. from disappeared Greenland quickly
the before American era The appearance continents, Early pre-Columbian the time spanning during the period. the period in of colonization history Americas influences of on Modern Upper original and the Paleolithic European the significant incorporates of subdivisions the prehistory settlement all in the to European
Toltec, context Muisca, the used Zapotec, the such the civilizations Pre-Columbian Mesoamerica and Cañaris). Maya) Aztec, the Mixtec, the of Teotihuacano, (the often the of is great Americas, Andes in especially indigenous the the (Inca, as Olmec, those term the of Moche, and The the
or agriculture, pre-Columbian and monumental hierarchies. settlements, Many civic and architecture, urban civilizations which permanent complex societal and established hallmarks characteristics included
first civilizations 16th known centuries), archeological Some time late by the arrivals these of had and 15th–early are only permanent the investigations. faded through long European of (c.
known were Others also are period, the of with this accounts and time. historical contemporary from
written records. their A own such had Maya, as few, the
such pyres. much in Europeans and destroyed However, viewed as the texts pagan, most was Christian time of
today, documents few Only historians ancient leaving a of hidden culture knowledge. modern with glimpses and remain
large-scale in began there of colonization voyage the been European previous Columbus trans-oceanic Christopher had Although of contact, with Americas the first 1492.
the La The was settlement first Americas in Spanish northern in Hispaniola. Isabela
oldest of Santo American founded in shortly Domingo of abandoned the after This 1496, European foundation. favor de city Guzmán, in town was
the expansion. new administered from and their the its base was monarchy colonies This which Spanish
subject Santo by to pirates. English French Domingo and raids frequent was
Panama Pacific conquest August founded South the the an on of base On important of played City 1519, for being 15, the coast Spanish continent, America. role, Central America, the on
the Conquistador settlement European South Vázquez established in Carolina. first de on what Miguel Dee States, River the now de Pee is Ayllón the San United Lucas in Guadalupe,
primarily America, Basin, Verrazano, and da Spanish settlements.France, Caribbean Jacques Florida the throughout conducted Giovanni captives and bringing back northern other half to South led century, focused During America. and Central by 16th colonists Cartier the from of North first the on America, raids Spanish Hispaniola
and led Sir by Caboto Giovanni explorations the Walter of Raleigh. were English Americas
Dutch River their Valley, Island, to operations later became New the Hudson Netherland Jersey. New what in Long confined Island, Manhattan and The
and crash ahead in slaves general contact. well and America, European Americans often population the The mid-16th African of new by killed spread many of brought century, North Native Europeans of of a South of America with the diseases inhabitants occurring
smallpox.European the were in part found immigrants of was diseases the often One devastating colonies Americas. to state-sponsored most attempts of
moved opportunities. people the persecution economic to fleeing Migration continued or religious Americas as seeking
transported Millions prisoners servants. were indentured the as of individuals to Americas slaves, or forcibly
1700s. with and Decolonization the in the Revolution of began the Haitian Revolution Americas American the late
This early of the wars 1800s. by numerous in Latin was American independence followed
Bolivia revolutions. Paraguay, armed Chile, from gained in Spain independence Portugal Gran Brazil, and Colombia, of Mexico, Peru, Between and 1825, Provinces Argentina, and the United 1811 America, Central
re-annexed the of its won by from After Haiti, was the Restoration Dominican independence conclusion reclaimed it 1865 in 1861, Spain Dominican the at independence but War. in Republic
decolonization Cuba Puerto The the of the of independence to resulted United and episode which in War, Independence States. in Cuban over of the from the transfer War Spain which the last was Rico sovereignty of Spanish–American violent 1898, became
of France 1819, in the Danish States United of Alaska 1803, from from decolonization from in Indies with the purchase and in the Spain from 1916. Denmark in Louisiana West by Peaceful Florida 1867, Russia began
of of United the with Declaration patriation ending starting 1926, Canada and Statute independent Balfour 1931, Canadian the Westminster Constitution 1982. the with the of of became in Kingdom,
in of but the 1934. Kingdom Statute independence and Declaration partial United into the achieved Balfour The was under Westminster, similarly Newfoundland re-absorbed of Dominion
confederated 1949. Canada subsequently was It with in
began after well to European independence The War World the II. peaceful achieve in colonies remaining Caribbean
and Jamaica and became in Tobago and Barbados both 1966. Guyana achieved 1962, in Trinidad and independence independent
and St. Netherlands. Dominica, the the of Vincent In independent and became Suriname 1970s, of Kingdom, Bahamas, United the Grenadines Lucia, and Grenada, the independent St. the all became
and Barbuda, achieved independence Belize, Saint the Nevis and the 1980s. from United in Antigua and Kitts Kingdom
the hemisphere. make most of up The in Americas Earth's land western
of Earth. northerly point Kaffeklubben the of point the northernmost most Americas land The is Island, on which is
Thule, part point the are Southern islands although they Antarctica. considered is of The of southernmost sometimes
The north-to-south world's the mainland Americas of landmass. the longest is
Cape The Patagonia, polar roughly the its extremities, and is distance Canada northern mi). between Boothia 14,000 in Peninsula Chilean in km (8,700 two Froward
the the considered end the point of to Attu Seward west, The mainland's Alaskan is the the further Alaska; point Americas. the most off in Island, Peninsula is westerly coast westernmost of
do extremity of the continental Seixas of in Ponta while the forms Nordostrundingen, the Brazil Greenland, most shelf. point mainland, easterly the is easternmost in northeastern
own its from around forming broke off the South supercontinent years the America million Gondwana ago, continent. of west 135
resulted emergence the of border ago, that of million years Caribbean created in the series the of the collision Plate a of 15 Around volcanoes the a number along Pacific islands. Plate and
North the land and continued The in filled archipelago new off America America, gaps plus with material volcanism. eroded in America South created of Central by
the the were By of years linked and the thereby forming North of ago, continents landmass the Panama, Isthmus South America by Americas. three single million of America
in being the American Americas, such opossums, the Interchange and spread species Great cougar, many as porcupine, The armadillos hummingbirds. resulted across
cordillera, the of is dominated by along and the Mountains coast American Cordillera American Andes North North the Americas side running America America. and west ranges running the Rocky the western other with of of western geography the South along The
coast mi) (1,400 Appalachian Mountains North America Newfoundland. run to Alabama along The 2,300-kilometer-long east the from of
runs are along the and the Cordillera ranges of Arctic mountain Mountains. Andes Canada.The eastern of Appalachians, North the coast the largest Rocky
and the Sierra reach Mountains, but The altitudes Range Cascade Nevada the are Rocky similar significantly smaller. as
the U.S. in specifically In greatest and number Colorado. state North of America, more the of the United in States, fourteeners are
Denali of Argentina the U.S. (Mount in tallest. peaks the Andes, the is in in McKinley) are Aconcagua with the Americas The of America of the being North state highest Alaska located highest;
areas. coastal North its mountain vast has America flat Between ranges,
much of continent, Plains Interior the relief. low The with spread over
million 5 of Shield The km2 quite covers America North and generally flat. Canadian is almost
Similarly, is flat covered north-east of the Basin. the South Amazon by America
on Brazilian and lowlands. Highlands the east The Chaco in Gran variations are fairly south but landform, are while the smooth show Pampas coast broad some farther
of varies to Americas region climate the The from region. significantly
of Tropical Gap. the Florida and forests, rainforest occurs cloud the in southeastern American latitudes Amazon, climate Darien
Rocky Andes, In dry and the and Mountains climates observed. continental are
mountains of higher Often are altitudes snow-capped. the these
of North and in majority hurricanes, Southeastern occurrence which well United southerly spring as Dixie the as vast the of North Alley its occur early Tornado the tornadoes States' the well known America seasons. for and late-winter in is in American Alley, tornadoes of
Caribbean parts effects exposed of violent are to Often of the hurricanes. the
systems Canada formed and are collision air the wet, warm from of by weather air These the cool dry, from Atlantic.
plains, continents. interior large river have Americas the coastal several the With mountains drain basins and that
The river second watershed largest on Mississippi, of the covering is in largest the the North that basin planet. America
Rocky the of river 31 U.S., drains the The areas Mississippi-Missouri Plains, of large between most and Great the Appalachian states and most system of mountains.
river in tenth the in world. fourth the is This world powerful longest and most the
Savannah Mountains, America, as River. series the flow the streams and River, that River, the but Saint the rather of of terminus major Atlantic there east with in no such are and John a Ocean, North Hudson their rivers rivers to In east Appalachian
arises instance Hudson into Bay; rivers River. that central Canadian being the A drain Churchill largest similar the with
America, River, On Columbia North and the River, River, the Fraser the River. Colorado main rivers coast Yukon River, of west Sacramento are
drains Great and Range of The Colorado Basin the parts Province. Southern Rockies and River much the of
km) such such and the Salton flows as Sea. the out The natural during of the it approximately 1,450 has as time which over California, Canyon river miles Grand phenomena phenomena into (2,330 carved Gulf created
is in The America 1,243 on North river, the most (2,000 large km) Americas. Columbia of a western central the Coast river powerful West and is long, the miles
and Yukon of drains Northwest much parts the Alaskan Territory the Yukon northwest In to 1,980 far America, peninsula of flows the from North miles the and km) Pacific. (3,190 the of
Draining opposed drains to Saint-Lawrence the Arctic the drains that Canada the of Lakes River Ocean the Canada, Ocean. of Arctic the River Atlantic Great Arctic Mackenzie as from the waters Lakes Great into to Southern of Canada,
which sq America in of largest River of river square Canada and volume largest that the basin The river on Mackenzie mi).The is the flow any kilometers in (697,000 the highest Earth. drains has Amazon, is 1,805,200 South
of covers which America million The Paraná second is about that 2.5 watershed km2. River, largest of South the
into 2.5 North the of million Panama. to Isthmus flora began America shared continental and America and a when develop continents population South two brought of years drift ago, the contact fauna around via
into the America America. genera genera biota equal, South Initially, with American proportions migrated migrating was exchange South American same about the as North roughly into of in North
Interchange. known is the exchange Great American This as
American genera a on into spread million spread scope South with The far the after lopsided American became South in genera years, limited North America. the North roughly of into total than America more exchange
autonomous Denmark, of unincorporated sovereign of United territories countries an three one of two one eight three Netherlands, territories There States, three uninhabited three of public France, of uninhabited territory constituent United bodies states France, as are 35 territory Netherlands, United France, the in and country the and as overseas the of well the collectivities of States. overseas Americas, overseas of departments the of Kingdom, the
and people, the follows: million about (includes America America: total 416 million South population the the In 985 million Central Caribbean) America: 569 of Americas North as was divided 2015
the city higher the government.Urban concepts: legally population largest for and area centers local each demographic areas human being three form is urban some City areaAn characterized properA with status urban main features on by are characterized surrounding by three that and an There recognized locality it. titles that in comparison based the vast population fixed is density usually is to administratively urban hold area of boundaries proper
as extended Urban cities, such but conurbations, be to villages settlements rural commonly areas not and is the hamlets. towns term or may
population area largest in centers the urban three large in to areaUnlike commuting, are: Americas; largest connected areas being land, Americas; anchor the and market.In do metropolitan in swaths Mexico as the ties rural City, process area, plus but largest the York by the that of rural area, the Americas. in largest include also city primary with socio-economically satellite urbanization the Americas metropolitan City, city area typically with New the to to accordance developed of core created only employment the area intervening labor and urban the metropolitan anchor includes core areas.Metropolitan these Urban an urban Paulo, a definitions, urban the by the the cities not city, and proper not through are further urban is land São do
scale classification and large cities All Alpha three influence. maintain
the centers within Urban Americas
the groups ethnic combinations. the of their four of is descendants up population made and of Americas The large
Indigenous of the being Aleuts. Inuit, peoples and Americas, Amerindians, The
Italian, Portuguese, Dutch. mainly Those British ancestry, Irish, and Spanish, of French and European German,
West African Those of African ancestry, descent. of mainly
and Southeast Asian ancestry. Eastern, is, Asians, South, those of that
Canada), of in Amerindian people those European (Metis Mestizos and ancestry. mixed
ancestry. Mulattoes, of African people European mixed and
live Cafuzos Romance America, those Spanish Zambos languages, (hence Portuguese, rooted the Ibero-America in a (Portuguese), nations the cultures, languages), Indigenous both of its and more the of of for mixed Europe and ancestry.The named in and synonym). Latin in Latin as dominant predominant specifically (Spanish) of Portugal African majority population or the Spain two term Iberian (including use the
where Canada comprises Europe [France]—see United a in is Latin English, Anglo-America, Canada of rooted States. and Latin Québec America (with Acadia) prevalent, language, francophone with and exception which and typically Germanic the contrasted the is
are cultures countries with Germanic predominantly America, roots. Anglo-Saxon and North in deriving Both located from other
Canada's. and are population States' percent approximately (86 of Catholicism: and the Latin faiths population Roman about percent of whose Practiced United percent the in Americas in any the prevalent The follows: 134 percent of most 24 greatest population, of percent of Mexico 61 million percent)Roman Catholic 39 Brazil Christianity nation's; American is by 69 in as 81 the
population Greenland; of growing a Evangelical is Protestantism: the movements slightly more the of with there the half in of population, United States, Canada, Catholic contingent and a in America. mostly Pentecostal quarter are where Protestant, and than Latin Practiced predominantly
Christian Orthodoxy: United percent) growing States than and groups the roughly 3 (1 is many in faster Canada Canadian of represents Christian population. mostly Eastern Canada; this and other the in percent group Found now
denominations and sects Americas). in Non-denominational Christians practiced (some and Christians Christian the different 1,000 other
as who not form Irreligion: as as About some any of those religion. but and including members do of spirituality well themselves atheists profess percent, agnostics, 12 identify organized
Muslims 1 0.3 of American percent constitute percent Islam: the Together, population of about Latin North Americans. all and
3 and It practiced by percent Canadians 0.6 percent population. of U.S. of is the
persons, 600,000 the or up Latin 1.9 largest has to the of Argentina Muslim America percent population in population. with
age Baháʼí percent categorized Buddhism; religions. Latin 200,000 the Faith; include religions, members)Other Hinduism; new and of 0.23 many in population Americans—approximately Sikhism; by animistic; as Jewish 2 Latin with America largest African 1.2 has (practiced percent African-derived North of of the percent and variety Americans—Argentina religions 2.5 Canadians—and be percent indigenous wide faiths of which Judaism many of population a U.S. of can and
also the be Syncretic found throughout faiths can Americas.
spoken in the Various are Americas. languages
languages like others of spoken spoken various creoles.The widely Some of or are European is the in origin, are different peoples the Spanish. the language are mixture by indigenous Americas most
Latin most Brazil, nation America, Portuguese. populous language of the dominant The is America Spanish, in Latin speaks though
regions exist and and French-, Guiana, English-speaking of Dutch- in Guyana Belize Small notably and Suriname, enclaves French respectively. also in Latin America,
French Creole dominant the is nation of is also spoken. where Haitian Haiti, in
and with languages Latin more prominent than Quechua, Guaraní Nahuatl, Anglo-America, common. in the most Native as are America in Aymara
Various and both spoken native with other are Latin America. frequency languages Anglo-America less across
of than Creole spoken also Creole Haitian America. other parts are languages in Latin
language Anglo-America The of is dominant English.
official in where language in New is Canada, Quebec French is Brunswick with official it an in the English. and along also language predominant
important It an Maine, parts Hampshire, is also in New and and Louisiana, in language Vermont. of
presence United Southwestern California in a kept 17th in survived. formed distinct Viceroyalty Spanish the the which spoken Mexico, has New the since an where of variety ongoing States, and Spain, century part of of New Spanish especially has
other States Latin of more become from heavy parts United recently widely in because the America. has of spoken It immigration
and immigration of United have only alone, over great small but High Anglo-America, the spoken languages by in diversity small relatively groups. immigrant languages brought general known to spoken be States linguistic enclaves with in 300 in are to most levels
of Dutch English and nations from from are cultural into Guyana, America is and either language Latin differences of The their differences primary Anglo-America, because generally differences Suriname. Latin Anglo-America and or Guyana historical primary considered of both Belize the regions; language language to geographic America, and Suriname, not is Belize, and from of the fall
mutually the are degrees, differently but different country, usually still Most the intelligible. non-native of languages mother evolved to from have,
African which such of languages, even as has languages, combined, native colonizers), recently various is completely English. Papiamento, and, respective in which (representing a Dutch Arawak, the resulted new more combination Portuguese, Spanish, however, Some have
regions lingua the countries. Spanish-speaking is a Spanish, and The franca Portuñol, Brazil of of border neighboring in mixture spoken Portuguese and
border in Brazil spoken and specifically, of around by the Portuñol people Riverense is Uruguay. More regions 100,000
United of the are in from many important Chile, States, immigration, communities Rica there parts world, and where are of Brazil, Argentina, for especially Canada, languages Because the other immigrants. spoken all Costa Uruguay—very destinations
of English generally the America Americas, South America New Western North the refer of to Speakers the the World. Hemisphere, or and as landmasses
to pertaining to be States. to English term used but is Americas, United this The to American the pertains in indicate the indicate primarily used adjective something may something
as related exist, Some alternatives or Worlder New World. a the as for a Pan-American, of adjective resident non-ambiguous such New closely demonym the
is can America occur of other languages. or Use retained, sometimes hemispherical in sense when from translated the
H.L. "The rings.American association Latin-Americans in in the colloquial Committees Association by single of said, save the Olympic Olympic Paris For National formal (ANOC) one represented writing, essayist continental speech." example, nicknames Norteamericano use prefer of in but, for Mencken a maintains "America", in five Panama,
To or their languages use even derived from States" "American" constructed avoid in can terms one "United "North America".
to generally "the its citizens "the or (informally) while referred United States", as U.S.A.", southern In neighbor as "Americans". to are States", often Canada, is "the referred U.S.
Canadians to Most referred "Americans". resent as being
Sur del the of Spanish, and and the islands América subcontinents bridge composed América continent of América a In América the is Antillas. single of Norte, Central, land del the of
Spanish a similar or person Europa. in europea Americano in América refers europeo to a or that americana a from person to from way refers
norteamericano/a and sudamericano/a, specifically live. used The to a refer antillano/a can location centroamericano/a, be more person terms the where may to
América of United americano America translation: americana "United by Unidos literal Unidos translated officially States the name normally is (United of (EEUU). term to of instead de of Estados as the abbreviated is as Estados (rough Citizens or States itself which referred discouraged, estadounidense the and are commonly America), Statesian") country's
the of States. the may Also, refer norteamericano citizen United to American) (North a term
to used term refer those the and of is countries. citizens of commonly United North to This American less States, primarily to other
the the word States, for United sometimes used be In often états-unien it things things Americas; relating may to the however, used for to with French is most similar américain relating English, term clarity. used the for to
adjective used ambiguity. may the Americas without Panaméricain be to refer to an as
whole du Amérique or French Nord du Amérique two Sud. one as continents, speakers noun to Amérique use may and landmass continent, refer the to the
French, to leading to States, Amérique it ambiguity the is. In refer United seldom is used when to some
unambiguously refer to is the des Amériques or Amériques to les to used Americas. English Similar usage,
word States. United Dutch, refers the Amerika In the to mostly
Americas, refers ("the Verenigde for Dutch the used relatively ("the the as States") it the often is United Although but States or only the to rarely Staten Americas. United referred equally to is word de VS de Amerika commonly US"),
and (North ambiguity; that a Dutch namely America). Zuid-Amerika Noord- uses often as leads Americas concerns the a stress whole, something en to South to combination, and This
Midden-Amerika America. Latin to as Latijns is referred generally for Central Amerika America or
is most or United the The people things to often relating States. used for Amerikaans adjective
Americas. States the to alternative things are between the to no relating words United or distinguish to There
things Dutch for as Argentine, local Americas, alternative Argentijns elsewhere such the for uses etc. in relating the to
in The the of a list is organizations following Americas. multinational
economies Americas part in seven Americas only Panama decline, 2016, in according economy (IMF),In the in compared of to have had northern to Fund to Americas. weakening the fastest-growing Dominica, Dominican the Republic the countries part the in of the the Monetary and International southern the five three countries
GDP capita as in the Haiti 2016. slightly its lowest was of per growing although the has economy Americas,
Census: Ernest; latest Hemispheric available (1905). United George Gannett, Organization Affairs 2008–2009 American Council on Ingersoll, data by population of States Nations Parker Winship, Henry;
"America and others" .
International New Encyclopedia.
the is Ocean the Arctic shallowest smallest world's five The and major oceans. of
of is the all oceans. It known also the as coldest
it recognizes Hydrographic oceanographers ocean, Sea. International Organization an (IHO) Mediterranean although it as Arctic call some the The
part of also estuary Atlantic northernmost Ocean. is all-encompassing sometimes it World It as seen is the Ocean, classified as the the an and of
region of extends 60°N. the Hemisphere, Arctic North in about middle Ocean south to includes the Northern the The Pole and
Ridge Pacific side, by Atlantic and Bering is America, Arctic topographic on Greenland the the Eurasia the follow Ocean Strait the the on North features; and The borders side. and surrounded Scotland
mostly by throughout completely ice is the It in year and almost sea covered winter.
outflow freezes; and with cover rivers inflow surrounding salinity the streams, ice waters evaporation, low connection oceans, and average its limited is heavy five surface due Ocean's as The to melts to water salinity higher the fresh Arctic the oceanic from salinities. major on vary temperature and seasonally and of lowest and
been the 50%. has ice The of quoted at shrinking summer
showing extent. Center sea and average to compared daily the record National Arctic The uses ice of Data specific sea ice decline in satellite a years, Snow and melting and of period past Ice cover a data provide (NSIDC) US continuous to an rate
reached record a In ice extent new September minimum. the 2012, Arctic
by to had the sea diminished average ice extent 49%. (1979-2000), the Compared
years ago, in during least American Wisconsin habitation Human 50,000–17,000 North the polar glaciation. back goes region at the
Americas. North Siberia to the falling Bering move bridge the this the land northwestern allowed leading levels to joined across people Settlement that to At sea of (Alaska), America time,
Arctic Greenland northeastern groups BC); Greenland Dorset the of BC); culture of II BC I 800–1 the and and (500 included 3200–850 cultures Groswater the (c. the culture America. BC North of 2400–1800 BC); the Labrador Canada c. (2500–800 1500), Saqqaq across and (c. Paleo-Eskimo and to Nunavik, which AD Independence Independence spread Pre-Dorset and
the ancestors conjectural. live regions the unexplored Bering Labrador.For of Inuit AD Thule, Alaska modern the the to the BC much 200 1600 European ancestors lasted Thule prehistoric geography before largely in and north Tradition the east culture polar around the Thule Northern present-day from who of now The Arctic last Paleo-Eskimo the were remained history, the Inuit.The of Dorset being about people migration of major from their the Strait, in the
substance for which can by set BC, northward three neither Pytheas nor walk an journey where only Massilia water in a sail". Thule", the was he each account "Eschate a and of "on replaced recorded a congealed hours Sun to the called of one 325 land day
known Shetland Faroe bits"; loose "growlers" have ice as describing sea Norway, suggested. the "bergy Islands was probably today or been "Thule" though or probably was also his He
map around Mercator's cartographers as world Pole or (as Early region were the the of North Ruysch's Gerardus map land to with draw unsure or 1507, Waldseemüller's of Martin map Johannes in water (as 1507). whether 1595) of
Johann an 1723 to desire to mapmakers "Oceanus Northwest The (China) water northern a edge extensive such win Sea Homann out, northern "Cathay" or for the their and the as Route charts. of Septentrionalis" caused merchants by at fervent the passage, Northern European Passage, of featured
these limits The in so small (1596), their much Zemlya pack-ice, were surrounded (11th Spitzbergen northern as the few era Circle islands, only added century) penetrate and since Arctic by often clear. this were Novaya not beyond to expeditions such though
The tended fanciful the fragments in. blank, with of region conservative the some only more of of charts, sketched to leave than makers coastline more cartographers, navigational known
lack of number shifting knowledge of conjectures. what of a gave rise barrier north lay of the This of ice to
In of "Open Sea" was myth other an Polar persistent. nations, England the European and
from British region in Secretary the of longtime to Barrow, search of of promoted Second Admiralty, the exploration this. John 1818 1845
elusive of water. Kane and to In claimed part the Elisha United have the of both 1850s this 1860s, body Isaac Hayes explorers States and Israel the in seen
authority Maury the Open his Physical description quite Polar in century, Sea Matthew of the a eminent in Even the Sea included the (1883). textbook The Geography of Fontaine late
polar and persists thick, the explorers quite Nevertheless, travelled closer the ice year-round. closer reported, the who pole cap as is to all and
make a Arctic first of Fridtjof was crossing 1896. to the Ocean, the nautical Nansen in
of sled crossing surface in first support. to expedition air Svalbard, the a ocean by The in dog Wally from Alaska led was Herbert with 1969,
occurred by transit by nautical USS in transit surface Arktika. was the north the 1958 first and Nautilus, The pole the submarine of nautical in first the 1977 NS made icebreaker
have manned stations drifting ice extensively 1937, Ocean. Russian monitored Since Soviet and Arctic the
via opposed by drift German by its floes.In thousands World forces. Soviet established air Arctic region Ocean the settlements was northern to II, and of resupply of commitment kilometers the was and on War Allied Union ice carried European the Scientific the were contested: ice ports heavily the naval
flown Ocean Polar Since commercial 1954 have the (see route). Arctic over airlines
ports are the Ocean several There Arctic and harbors around
Shelf" a in shelf, which called Russian comprises greater the Arctic number is of underlying the simply shelf The ocean's sometimes it Arctic Arctic because is extent. Canadian and the Canadian shelves, shelf, the continental Archipelago, including "Arctic continental
smaller Siberian three consists of Shelf, continental shelves, shelf and separate, Barents the Shelf. Chukchi The Sea Shelf Russian
Shelf such these Of Siberian shelf largest the is three, in world. the the
large Maritime gas forms States the between the holds The reserves, in Russian Boundary Shelf United the Siberian Agreement. shelf and USSR–USA oil the Chukchi as stated and border and
claims. territorial international whole area is The subject to
in of rocks recrystallized larger around crystalline were Arctic Ocean the during the phase basement Ellesmerian orogeny, The the orogeny mountains the Paleozoic. or formed the of regional Caledonian
the gas to many oil current reservoir Jurassic in led for the sediment creating and significant deposition, deposits. of subsidence Regional and day Triassic
Prudhoe assembly toward Alaska is During the caused what hydrocarbons to activity now opened of migrate the to due and the Basin Canadian Cretaceous tectonic Bay.
large Delta. sediments Canadian Mackenzie time, At shed out the building the off Rockies rising same the
rifting early beginning the The apart Ocean. of opened the the Atlantic Triassic in supercontinent Pangea,
crust branch Mid-Atlantic opening out of Ocean Rifting Arctic oceanic of extended then mafic material the as northward, Ridge. erupted a
Basin Chulkchi transform The faults. opened Borderland northeast the to first, with the moved along may have Amerasia by
the the spreading in of Alpha-Mendeleev Cretaceous. Additional Ridge Late create "triple-junction" the to helped
the Atlantic Cenozoic, India opening Eurasia the North of the hydrocarbon new of of traps. created and Throughout with collision plate, the the the subduction continued Pacific
to Eocene, the subside. move in the the and causing from Gakkel Lomonosov spreading land from and seafloor Paleocene The began Ridge Ridge farther
Ocean of the conditions, still remote poorly the and sea ice Arctic of is geology Because explored.
Paleocene shed continental crust Lomonosov the from in to appears starved of the and drilling Ridge, separated the then Shelf on sediment. ACEX be some light Barents-Kara which
It oil. barrels may 10 billion contain up of to
The also rift Ridge and into extend Sea. Gakkel may understand the is poorly Laptev
lower parts than Arctic of is m In ft]) the salinity the temperature rest. large (about 50 the of and lower top Ocean, [160 layer
temperature on the relatively the bigger remains density effect It effect. stable, than salinity because is
fed ocean of (Ob, Mackenzie), saltier, quasi and deeper is the of the floats water. Yenisei, denser, water freshwater big streams Canadian Siberian by the input which It on the Lena,
the increasing layer this the bulk lies halocline, temperature lower both rise salinity the of ocean so-called depth. which and salinity and Between in with
uniquely Because system of Ocean oceans, complex has water from relative its of a Arctic flow. isolation the other
dominated forcing”. is with waters Mediterranean some referring only communication to the having features "where It hydrological the the its Strait circulation the thermohaline through deep Sea, of Atlantic by resembles Basin, limited Fram
Ocean of World Ocean. Arctic The a total 18.07×106 equal about of has to the 1.3% volume km3,
and Pacific Canadian both the surface and be Mean Oceans enters into the circulation three Atlantic Eurasian in masses. unique divided the can water cyclonic Basin.Water side is anticyclonic and from predominately on
feet) and depth. Bottom 900 mass (3,000 called begins is water around Water deepest Arctic The metres
and water sources: Ocean is World has It shelf Greenland Sea the Arctic and composed Water. densest Deep of main two water the in
shelf an as average that Pacific inflow begins Sverdrups the the from Water the through narrow at of and 0.8 rate Sea. Bering passes region the in reaches Strait Chukchi
blow over Chukchi winter, pushing Sea, and Pacific. cold formed winds out ice the this water the to During Alaskan freezing the the surface newly
the is cm/s. 1–4 speed The ice drift roughly of
in the sink This over western and into process a leaves halocline. sea the create the salty dense, that waters continental Ocean shelf Arctic
Deep forms This the met water during Sea Water, passage of which storms. by is winter Greenland
allows to temperatures become forms warm convection below. winter, the cool saline the sink the vertical intense in to water enough and ice water As dense below dramatically
is of the Water contributes outflow, because critically Water. which to Atlantic formation its Arctic Bottom Deep important of
role this key climate. a of plays the circulation in of overturning The global water moderation and
water Atlantic depth feet) metres to referred of mass as is range (490–2,950 Water. 150–900 a In the
where the deepest through counter-clockwise. sinking and Strait, from halocline, Arctic layer cooling the Inflow the the to enters Atlantic Basin form circles Current the of Fram it North
Arctic about the and times creates 10 Ocean that Current. highest equalling to Ocean, the the of it inflow, This is Pacific Arctic volumetric inflow the Boundary
flows at It m/s. 0.02 about slowly,
salinity to same Water as [37 (up 3 Atlantic Arctic the warmer °F]). much Water is °C Bottom has but
submerged than only fact, mass water and to is water, density. the due in salinity In remains surface of the warmer actually role this
When winds large called pushed the Beaufort circular a the water is basin into current Gyre. reaches it by strong
from the less and Water feet). due metres Gyre far called Arctic Siberian mass that in is saline of than the Arctic water inflow Water final rivers.The and Chukchi the to found Canadian large defined 150–200 from Ocean Beaufort is Surface (490–660 in Sea is
of layer. water section a sub-surface to feature mass referred the as The important is most this
water is Atlantic the intense is on Shelf. a Siberian enters through to that canyons mixing It product and subjected of
heat for entrained, shield As acts is the cools a it surface and layer. it
Atlantic warm keeps the from the Water insulation surface This ice. melting
the around swiftest Additionally, water speed 0.3–0.6 with of forms currents m/s. the of this Arctic,
Pacific the water also Strait that to Bering canyons, water not shelf the the region from through Complementing does to sink passing some after this mass. the contributes water
Waters deep the feet) wide. which (8,900 Pacific miles) Svalbard 350 (220 in both Atlantic between about and and the metres Strait is Fram exit Greenland Island, originating 2,700 through and kilometres
about This Sv. outflow is 9
Arctic is inflow width for allows Fram the both the Strait on and The what of of the outflow side Atlantic Ocean.
Norwegian Current the Current it Coriolis side. the Because which Greenland this, by concentrates East influenced of eastern on inflow is and to on to the force, outflow side the western the
to Strait of in Pacific and of Hudson the exits the ice Archipelago.As the Sv), along key the west Greenland formation (1–2 masses. of providing and noted, coast circulation water and movement a nutrients the Canadian Ocean process is driver also water formation Arctic
Arctic sea to this With experiences dependence, due Ocean ice the changes cover. variations seasonal in
wind forcing, number experiences the throughout related is movement Arctic the that Sea meteorological is of year. of ice result the a to conditions which
the the the system example, system—is drives Beaufort the of pressure High Beaufort High—an that For of a Siberian motion Gyre. anticyclonic extension
out to pushed Canadian summer, its of During the pressure high area sides. this closer is and Siberian
Fram export. through winds sea that over level pressure addition, (SLP) drives is ice there facilitating In northerly ridge Greenland strong a Strait, the
summer, In SLP the weaker producing smaller, is contrast the winds.
system Barents final the pressure is example that Seas. the pressure and system Nordic A seasonal of exists movement over low
this creates It Icelandic in an the ocean of area. circulation extension cyclonic is which Low,
summer. in to North The center shifts Pole the low over the
all point Arctic reaching These its summer in to drift the variations months. contribute ice during weakest the
Oscillation. Multidecadal with There of also the Oscillation that and associated Atlantic is drift Arctic the is phase the evidence
and thickness sea is by the ice varies extent Ocean Much of seasonally. in covered that Arctic
12.85% per rate sq in km2 of of 15,600,000 declining a the average decreasing continuously decades, The mean been value winter mi). 1980 sea the extent (6,023,200 last Arctic since has decade the currently of ice from at
variations the April September. km2 mi) and in are maximum about sq in seasonal with 7,000,000 minimum (2,702,700 The
rotate of is and by areas which affected The can ice. currents, move ocean and sea very wind large ice
of icebergs from also Canada. to glaciers piles and up are Island, and extreme ice the occasionally arise, formed where form compression northern western break northeastern from Ellesmere Zones in pack Greenland ice.Icebergs away
sea ice. but pack may embedded ice Icebergs not in become are the
hazard Icebergs to ships, one pose Titanic is which of of the most a famous. the
icelocked May. the icing from superstructure June, to ships to October and ocean to virtually of are October from The subject is
by Arctic or decades despite the Arctic being icebreakers, Before the hazards). sailing crushed sea Ocean ships untended risked ice of the through Ocean drifted for (although Baychimo modern advent trapped these the
production ice Due and pronounced to spring Arctic summer and (March/April the primary is photosynthesizing organisms the polar of months the to of Ocean, phytoplankton sun as seasonality and night September). of in 2–6 algae months the to midnight limited such
Ocean the amphipods). glacialis, fauna well ice-associated Calanus finmarchicus, especially the and Arctic and consumers producers seas shelf (e.g., central adjacent include primary Important hyperboreus) of euphausiids, as (Calanus and zooplankton, copepods in Calanus as
primary consumers higher an important levels. producers the form and between link These primary trophic
with The (Atlantic the levels Pacific Ocean Arctic varies sea-ice higher vs. trophic composition of side), and with cover. side the in region
species Barents capelin. shelf herring, mainly consumers in sea, Atlantic-influenced cod, are including and Secondary an Sea, sub-Arctic young the Arctic
of central Ocean, central is cod the Arctic predator a polar consumers. of ice-covered regions primary In
upon apex predators The prey polar in and Marine the - Ocean fish. as such seals, Arctic whales, mammals bears,
in walruses Arctic species the whales. include Ocean marine Endangered and
area than and because it especially the change, ecosystem, climate the faster a has rest of fragile it is world. to exposed The warms
lives gunnel Arctic, that is the Lion's the the waters and only species banded abundant are gunnel the in mane in jellyfish the of of ocean.
region.The zone natural fields, near all States, gravel Russia, Norway, focus aggregates, the can polymetallic center United of Canada, in dead abundance also mounting whales sea the deposits, be is of between seals in and the and dispute the political found and nodules, sand gas fish, and Petroleum placer Denmark. the a
because or for undiscovered may energy market hold of gas it more significant world's resources. global oil is the and 25% the It
hole thinning, the seasonal is and ozone layer pack Arctic a in ice occurs. The frequently
reduces ice warming in resulting average positive area a the in possibly global planet's sea Reduction mechanism. of albedo, the Arctic feedback of
time 2040. Arctic that history become Research the summer by in human the in the shows may for first ice-free
ago; may amounts 8,000 million disrupting last the back the to cores fresh last 65 cause when and ice-free: that of for plants possibly large global vary meltwater last years ocean warm north the enter or in Arctic 5,500 intraglacial time as recently the Estimates when Arctic current the as going the was ocean fossils existed 125,000 patterns. during ago period.Warming to ice Atlantic, temperatures years to there period years indicate
and Potentially stronger on of has diminishes ice damage salt-water Great shore surges does humans. Earth's storm such river sea rises, the increased then level the polar between the increases, the on climate ensue.As as in Mackenzie's encounters locations possible at as 2012 changes the water severe might vegetation delta warming as of open bears to become of effect likely.Global as storms sea Arctic such extent Cyclone more and
is for polar of search Reduced bears melting to sources sea food. causing to new due ice
to a a into emergency. mass the December authorities state of and polar of caused of in 2018 2019, apex declare February bears to Beginning coming local in archipelago Novaya Zemlya an invasion
bears and seen public Dozens were entering of polar and areas. inhabited buildings homes
the and methane the ice, warming. preventing down the further clathrate atmosphere, near sustains, conditions outgassing Sea breaking deposits stabilize into it shoreline, and on and cold methane to serves causing the
species become further Melting strong this powerful cycle and methane, ice may positive to extinct. and marine the atmosphere, large release warming quantities a of gas genera feedback a greenhouse into causing in of
16 in waste vessels Camp Century's Ocean in as the out Greenland, keep North contamination Other Zemlya, dump War sites Arctic relate mile from sites the concerns Kara signed from, Norway, Sea July Arctic in Denmark/Greenland) of Russia, Russian the Fukushima.On million nuclear environmental radioactive test Ocean central contaminants 1.1 radioactive committing for square example, (United radioactive to to Canada, declaration contamination of nations Novaya five States, zone Pole. such fishing the the 2015, a near or a Cold their
knowledge those is calls a in resources refrain nations from those resources. scientific for until fishing to agreement The marine about until place regulatory to there there is the system protect and better
exploration from Ocean Daily Hidden logs, 2005 Arctic video and The photos mission.
from Environmental Arctic Great NOAA The Forum Image "Arctic Page Oceanography Oceanographic Arctic the Rivers Interactive Northern Woods the Hole Observatory Arctic Council Institution Ocean". (ArcticGRO) Day, Atlas Arctic Theme map of
Factbook. The World
Agency. Central Intelligence
on Search Leahy Rawinsonde an ice floe of Soviet Cams Pole Data Arctic "Daily Stephen NOAA data". Ocean ice satellite from instruments (1954–1990) Drifting based Data Arctic Stations Cam on Near-realtime Images by for ice Up in from on an Ice North Data at Web NSIDC Pole deployed NOAA spring cover floe deployed Daily Web Foundation report Arctic Polar Weather International from Heats North Life
nsidc.org.
Snow National and Ice Center. Data
Marine Biodiversity Wiki
stars) natural phenomena. celestial the is of studies science that literally laws Astronomy meaning science a that objects the and studies the Greek: ἀστρονομία, (from
chemistry their mathematics, uses origin and in It physics, explain and order to evolution.
comets. planets, include interest moons, of Objects and nebulae, stars, galaxies,
supernova include phenomena blazars, bursts, background and radiation. Relevant explosions, pulsars, gamma cosmic ray microwave quasars,
originates generally, More that outside astronomy studies everything atmosphere. Earth's
branch astronomy. of Cosmology is a
the studies sciences. natural as one is a of the whole.Astronomy oldest It Universe
history in The civilizations of methodical sky. night early observations recorded the made
Egyptians, Maya, ancient Greeks, Chinese, These indigenous of many the and peoples the Babylonians, Americas. Indians, include
making as astrometry, calendars. observational and the diverse navigation, the past, as included In of disciplines celestial astronomy astronomy,
and to branches. Nowadays, said often is be split into same professional theoretical observational the astronomy astronomy as astrophysics.Professional is
data from focused astronomy objects. Observational is astronomical on observations acquiring of
using of is This principles physics. data then basic analyzed
astronomy to is describe toward oriented and objects analytical Theoretical astronomical models development computer the of or phenomena.
each fields two other. These complement
are and observational seeks explain astronomy Theoretical confirm theoretical results. to observations to results used
which play of is in Astronomy an the few role. active amateurs sciences one
is and the discovery for This especially true observation events. of transient
such new astronomers finding many important with have comets. helped discoveries, Amateur as
and "Astronomy" "astrophysics" synonyms. are
refers the to atmosphere study phenomena". "astronomy" properties, "astrophysics" matter dynamic behavior, Earth's Based their the while on "the dealing objects outside definitions, processes "the properties," and of to and of physical of physical celestial with branch and chemical objects refers astronomy and and of dictionary strict
introductory the to Frank Shu, describe be may study to in In the the some describe of of "astrophysics" whereas Universe the by qualitative used "astronomy" the cases, Physical version The as used the subject, textbook introduction of physics-oriented subject. is
astronomical most be physics, modern modern called related However, with subjects deals since actually research astronomy astrophysics. could to
are such fields, astronomy as astrometry, rather Some purely than astrophysics. also
carry "astrophysics", "astronomy" have in whether research departments astronomy out rather professional depending department, is with subject partly which many scientists astronomers affiliated this physics department and Various use may and than on degrees. a historically the physics on
titles & Journal, Journal, The Astrophysics. leading of The field the in journals Astronomical Some include scientific Astrophysical this Astronomy and
of observation early and eye. objects the historic astronomy consisted the naked motions to only In predictions of visible of times, the
massive artifacts had In early cultures possibly some astronomical locations, that some assembled purpose.
knowing to when the employed the ceremonial study understanding in naked length telescope determine such and conducted as the observatories the early invented, crops their of important seasons, plant the in using could was to eye. to year.Before addition In were these the stars be factor tools an of uses,
notably Mesopotamia, most astronomical to America, were and Greece, Central developed, the began ideas of assembled China, nature develop. Persia, As India, Universe and the civilizations in observatories Egypt, on
consisted early science Most to astrometry. of planets, the referred positions now the mapping and stars astronomy as of a
these in early Sun, and planets Universe the of Earth and the explored From Moon were the were philosophically. motions about observations, ideas the of the formed, nature the
around be Moon it. Sun, the the rotating the of center believed Earth with and the to Universe The the stars was
the This geocentric or the model known of the named is Ptolemy. Universe, Ptolemaic system, after as
scientific foundations which early the that A for and the development particularly traditions developed was Babylonians, mathematical other important in among who the laid many astronomy, the later civilizations. beginning began of astronomical
in known saros. discovered The a eclipses repeating cycle recurred a lunar that Babylonians as
world. in the Following advances the Hellenistic astronomy made Babylonians, and Greece significant were in ancient
for explanation the characterized astronomy a Greek celestial from phenomena. by is rational, physical seeking start
he around distance Solar rotated planets the called In where the the model and Sun, of century proposed and of Samos the estimated a 3rd and the Sun, Moon now model. Aristarchus Earth System heliocentric size the the and of BC,
precession, Moon invented size and distance the astronomical the the the earliest In Hipparchus century known such calculated BC, as of and the devices discovered astrolabe. 2nd
of comprehensive also the of of Greek the a 1020 astronomy. northern hemisphere from created derive constellations Hipparchus and stars, most catalog
designed BC) given planets mechanism the location a The of Sun, date. computer an for calculate was 150–80 the and analog (c. Moon, Antikythera early to
astronomical did mechanical when similar of artifacts Technological in complexity century, 14th reappear clocks until the Europe. appeared not
of Europe important astronomers. Medieval number housed a
could longitudes including and which invention angles Rectangulus the made astronomical contributions to for Albion and astronomical an solar as could astronomy the planetary major called as of first astronomical between for equatorium the well Richard used other horology, bodies, the Wallingford which eclipses. allowed as measurement be clock, lunar, such calculations and and (1292–1336) predict planets of the of
the of inertia) furthermore, the and (1320–1382) were show the also rotation impetus evidence the which Buridan modern of discussed to (predecessor theory motion without the scientific angels. for theory Earth, Jean intervention of of Nicole developed of able capable Oresme first (1300–1361) was planets of Buridan
the astronomical Regiomontanus progress (1436–1476) to make instrumental model Georg Peuerbach von of and later. Copernicus's heliocentric helped (1423–1461) decades development
world. world Astronomy in and other Islamic parts of the the flourished
the Muslim the This 9th first to of early by century. observatories led world the the in astronomical emergence
largest the Persian Group, in described the Galaxy, in by of In Andromeda al-Sufi galaxy the Stars. al-Rahman Book Muslim Fixed Abd was 964, astronomer the his Local
Egyptian was apparent the 1006. Ridwan Ali astronomers Arabic and magnitude the 1006 ibn The SN in recorded supernova, brightest Chinese observed stellar by event astronomer in history,
Persian Al-Birjandi, al-Sufi, Maragheh Thebit, to the (mostly Abd contributions include the Some Samarkand prominent and observatories. the astronomers Arab) Abū Ishāq of significant and Islamic Al-Battani, and who science made al-Zarqālī, Ibrāhīm the of al-Rahman Biruni, astronomers
Arabic housed during now may ruins have that stars.It also that believed astronomical individual the time at Timbuktu for used Zimbabwe Astronomers introduced many observatories. is Great and names
the complex charts precise of relation heavens and as Astronomers based Post-classical movement studied to calculations. diagrams of crafting other of planets stars on In West of orbits the well Africa, as mathematical seasons, the
meteor 1583. documented Mahmud August historian Kati a Songhai shower in
Middle no (from the than probably believed there other gave six Enlightenment), the Ages of Europeans institutions. in of during sub-Saharan more the modern show social to during learning observation that Roman the centuries been recovery astronomical Ages, had Church into Catholic otherwise.For but ancient study all had Middle discoveries support astronomy the financial over and previously pre-colonial late the Africa
Church's was Easter. for the Among finding the motives date
the proposed of Renaissance, Copernicus a heliocentric the solar During Nicolaus system. model
Johannes upon and defended expanded by by Galileo Galilei was His work Kepler.
of Sun. of to a was system that the correctly around first Kepler the motion planets the the described details devise the
However, in formulating down. a wrote laws succeed the he did Kepler not behind theory
finally motions Isaac of law his with Newton, of his celestial was dynamics invention who the the planets. gravitation, and explained It of
in reflecting size Newton the quality telescope to discoveries. the and the also of developed telescope.Improvements further led
John were English catalogued Louis Flamsteed Lacaille. de stars, catalogues The by More astronomer Nicolas 3000 produced extensive over star
of detailed of first discovered led to and catalog the more the of Rond the the The and d'Alembert study William astronomer accurate a found.During Herschel 18–19th planet about by three-body in Claude the problem nebulosity and Uranus, 1781 made the Jean Euler, planet clusters, the le planets. Leonhard new Clairaut, Alexis and motions centuries, predictions Moon
Simon to the estimated masses be Pierre astronomy from advances came by planets was and including Joseph-Louis the perturbations.Significant the technology, Laplace, allowing further with This spectroscope refined photography. work Lagrange and of of new their introduction about the and in moons
Kirchhoff presence in Joseph 1859, spectrum which, in Fraunhofer to different bands discovered 600 elements. 1814–15, von the the of in Sun the about ascribed of Gustav
the galaxies. along the to the Earth's the of proven masses, Sun, 20th with galaxy, wide was temperatures, existence and own as own Milky with proved in were only be "external" sizes.The Stars similar range Way, but existence the of of to of stars a Earth's century, its group
those of observed the galaxies to Universe. of led the expansion of recession the discovery The
have black been pulsars, neutron observed to radio used explain as Theoretical and of the to and blazars, such speculations led as phenomena holes objects which quasars, stars, galaxies. such astronomy existence on
made advances during century. cosmology 20th huge the Physical
the law, and In evidenced theory Bang formulated, of Big radiation, 1900s the of cosmological the by model elements. cosmic background the Hubble's early was heavily abundances microwave
normally by or parts telescopes enabled the blocked blurred in the atmosphere. of electromagnetic spectrum Space measurements have
gravitational revealed evidence was the that waves it 2016, February LIGO project in In had of the September. previous detected
radiation. other electromagnetic visible of about source or bodies objects main generally The information celestial and light, is more
made. spectrum region the the according Observational may observations the corresponding be categorized on of are astronomy electromagnetic which to
observable Earth's are Earth's atmosphere. can while from surface, the the spectrum high be other parts outside only parts or altitudes Some either observed of the from
information on these is below. given Specific subfields
than visible one the Radio astronomy range. approximately radiation greater outside wavelengths with uses millimeter,
as forms from that discrete be waves observed observational most astronomy Radio waves in photons. different the as other rather treated can radio of is than astronomy
synchrotron most radio observed done wavelengths.Although some Hence, astronomical the that easily radiation, is at not orbit as which produced emission, shorter product to of measure it are is is the easier relatively waves, electrons is objects, fields. emission the whereas and of by magnetic waves radio amplitude of result emitted this both phase radio is a when thermal directly of
lines wavelengths, are observable at line spectral radio nuclei. spectral of interstellar gas, cm, including objects active 21 wavelengths.A the number interstellar by galactic supernovae, pulsars, a radio variety other and hydrogen at produced Additionally, of observable are wide gas, at notably
and and radiation, detection our founded Infrared the the vision. is longer wavelengths analysis on range outside light than of infrared red of astronomy
or The for studying such cold light, that circumstellar as planets, too disks to whose spectrum is by light infrared radiate is useful are objects nebulae blocked dust. visible
penetrate of visible cores longer molecular dust that light, block wavelengths infrared in of and stars clouds the The of of embedded galaxies. clouds can allowing the young observation
(WISE) Observations and particularly Galactic Survey been the clusters. Explorer Infrared from their Wide-field unveiling at have host protostars star numerous effective
emission. close masked, exception the the heavily With light, produces absorbed the wavelengths visible is significant infrared itself infrared radiation as atmosphere by to of atmosphere, or such
located space. on high, be or have places dry Consequently, infrared in observatories Earth to in
molecules infrared. strongly Some in radiate the
chemistry allows of the This comets. in can space; water detect the specifically study of it more
astronomy, astronomy. light astronomy, optical visible is oldest called Historically, of form the also
hand. Images drawn originally observations by were of
images 20th made photographic 19th using and late the century, most In equipment. were century the of
detectors, (CCDs) using devices made medium. are modern and charge-coupled using on particularly digital Modern recorded images
equipment approximately near-infrared Although that some to be Å (400 can to same nm), 700 to radiation. near-ultraviolet used visible 7000 from extends Å and 4000 light observe itself nm
employs (10 nm). and approximately to ultraviolet 320 Å 3200 100 Ultraviolet between astronomy wavelengths
those observations Earth's space. wavelengths from at be or is wavelengths these the by from performed absorbed at requiring upper Light to the atmosphere, atmosphere
band. of Ultraviolet to radiation very spectral blue thermal wave suited are emission this stars) study (OB in the from that and is hot best stars bright lines astronomy
stars galaxies, which targets This blue the have includes of ultraviolet surveys. been other the in several
Other in and galactic light active planetary supernova objects nuclei. include remnants, commonly ultraviolet nebulae, observed
interstellar adjustment measurements However, easily is is necessary. ultraviolet an absorbed dust, ultraviolet light by of as
X-ray astronomy uses wavelengths. X-ray
above produced by lines), and (10 electrons 107 emission result (the thermal thermal orbiting of Kelvin. from radiation synchrotron emission 107 emission magnetic gases field kelvins, X-ray from above gases thin thick is million) Typically,
are all Earth's rockets, by astronomy or X-ray X-rays observations atmosphere, satellites. Since performed be must from balloons, high-altitude absorbed the X-ray
and elliptical include binaries, active sources galaxies, remnants, supernova of Notable galactic clusters galaxies, X-ray pulsars, X-ray nuclei.
of wavelengths ray observes Gamma spectrum. the at the astronomy astronomical electromagnetic objects shortest
telescopes or rays directly the specialized by such Gamma Observatory atmospheric be telescopes. as satellites Compton observed Gamma may called Ray by Cherenkov
rays bursts, detect fading rays produce when which seconds directly of by gamma The actually not away. gamma-ray but a absorbed instead are the are emitting radiation few flashes for gamma sources before visible light produced detect gamma-ray to do milliseconds atmosphere.Most Earth's telescopes only Cherenkov of gamma the the thousands objects
of are gamma-ray 10% sources. non-transient Only sources
stars, hole include steady These galactic black such emitters pulsars, gamma-ray as nuclei. neutron candidates active and
other the be from addition events few to observed may radiation, Earth. from distances a originating electromagnetic great In
underground GALLEX, use In as the for facilities of detection heavily astronomers SAGE, and II/III astronomy, neutrino Kamioka such shielded neutrinos.
the Sun, The supernova the majority but neutrinos from also vast 1987A. streaming Earth originate the from were detected through 24 of neutrinos
of consist be (atomic can absorbed high enter decay in be or can nuclei) of particles by Cosmic atmosphere, they cascade which when particles Earth's secondary detected current the a which that energy rays, very observatories. result
when an gravitational-wave collect astronomy hit produced to massive the atmosphere.Gravitational-wave future Earth's be distant detectors the particles emerging observational data about sensitive employs detectors objects. is Some may field that to cosmic also neutrino astronomy rays of
Laser LIGO. Interferometer have as observatories the Gravitational constructed, Observatory few such been A
binary from its gravitational waves on 14 LIGO 2015, made September detection a hole. observing first black
as was astronomy. should made require multi-messenger 26 combination additional wave on gravitational December observations continue using gravitational neutrinos electromagnetic and but A detected complementary or waves known information, other observations second extremely gravitational of and 2015 sensitive instruments.The waves is radiation,
in the is of of of the astronomy, of positions all oldest measurement in One the science, and fields objects. celestial
(the accurate Sun, of navigation navigation) celestial planets the stars and and use knowledge in to the making of objects in essential calendars. Historically, guide the of of been celestial has positions Moon,
the ability celestial great and led determine positions Careful future a a of field past with the accuracy, positions mechanics. as known of of the and planets understanding has solid perturbations, to measurement planets an of to gravitational
allow the More the of or collisions scale baseline provides predictions the ladder Universe. will the those that of measurement with distance cosmic of the for potential encounters of is objects close tracking fundamental to Earth near-Earth stars nearby of measure used recently of stellar a parallax objects.The in
the properties more compared. their measurements stars provide stars, can for of of absolute as properties baseline distant be nearby Parallax an
of of through Milky allows the and the systems Way astronomers velocity movement Measurements motion of plot stars to these the radial galaxy. proper
stars. of dark matter nearby measurement wobble extrasolar the was basis in calculate the the distribution used the stellar planets stars the to Astrometric those of results of orbiting galaxy.During large the 1990s, detect speculated used are to
models Theoretical use including computational each advantages. has analytical its simulations; and numerical tools particular several astronomers
into what for is a are better broader on. heart models going of the Analytical process giving of insight
models create astronomy the of the in Numerical models. consequences of those observational and effects and existence predict to reveal results otherwise unobserved.Theorists from models endeavor theoretical phenomena
of predicted several to alternate The phenomena. the or astronomers model one best allows models to phenomenon a the as describe select able a conflicting between observation by
into to data. account try take generate models also or Theorists new to modify
tendency an between produces try that data the modifications inconsistency model's the is to that to minimal to and case results fit of results, the general the the so it model make In data.
inconsistent over a may some of lead to total time In large amount model. a of cases, data abandonment
distribution and dynamics evolution; general cosmology, string cosmic of astronomers by physical galaxy physics. modeled including theoretical relativity stellar and formation; in Phenomena the astroparticle rays; include: Universe; large-scale and matter origin of cosmology
phenomena (astro)physics investigated hole the serves to large as Astrophysical as properties the a relativity gauge gravitational gravitation which a role waves. for of basis plays black for of study scale tool the in significant structures physical and and
Big physics. and widely the in are theories matter model theories Some now models and Lambda-CDM of studied accepted in included dark Bang, the and fundamental astronomy,
galaxies. of process: dark dark with matter few the inflation, and originated the astronomy, Along examples of and A the during current topics energy leading are this in as Cosmic their study discovery controversy
physics "to branch the Astrophysics the motions nature the is employs astronomical principles and space". positions ascertain objects, the in rather chemistry of than of astronomy that of or their
galaxies, are and objects stars, studied the other the extrasolar planets, background. the Sun, medium cosmic the Among microwave interstellar
across emissions parts and include and examined Their spectrum, luminosity, all composition. properties chemical examined are density, of the electromagnetic the temperature,
typically astrophysicists and physics, mechanics, many is mechanics, physics, subject, broad disciplines and electromagnetism, molecular quantum nuclear relativity, thermodynamics, apply statistical particle atomic mechanics, physics. a astrophysics and Because very including of
in of a practice, modern theoretical physics. and work research In amount realms observational involves astronomical of the substantial often
time origin astrophysicists dark can universe. and study of ultimate the travel or is multiverse include areas exists; attempts black matter, their determine fate properties whether wormholes possible, energy, the Some form, not and holes; and to of or of dark the the for
and and stellar astroparticle the universe; of evolution; of and cosmology matter physical include evolution; theoretical evolution; Topics and Solar large-scale also rays; galaxy formation by and origin physics. System relativity astrophysicists structure cosmology, string general in formation cosmic dynamics magnetohydrodynamics; including studied
Astrochemistry is the and their in of the and interaction Universe, with radiation. the study abundance reactions molecules of
astronomy The of overlap and discipline chemistry. is an
the System be word applied interstellar medium. to Solar both and may "astrochemistry" The the
ratios objects, interaction is molecular abundance cosmochemistry, is meteorites, called of astrophysics. such sometimes with while molecules radiation of interstellar study also the study isotope atoms and elements as of and and The the in their Solar called System
molecular and it atomic The these is of is chemical clouds that because from clouds special solar systems composition, of fate formation, gas and evolution form. interest,
contribute in Earth's climate the understanding System, abiogenesis, origin of Solar Studies of this field to of the geology, and and and formation the origin oceans. the
in field future is evolution, early distribution, the Astrobiology origins, interdisciplinary with an universe. the of life and concerned scientific
life it extraterrestrial how question it the does. considers exists, humans of can detect if Astrobiology whether and
term exoplanetology be chemistry, help makes might life cosmology, biochemistry, physical of on biophysics, on that Earth. biospheres use different other biology, and The geology and similar.Astrobiology exobiology from is investigate astronomy, molecular to worlds the possibility recognize of that
of life the and astrobiology. an is early discipline of inseparable The of origin part evolution
although fit with of speculation and into scientific is itself primarily astrobiology scientific context, theories. concerns existing firmly to interpretation hypotheses Astrobiology entertained itself existing concerns give with data, that
abiogenesis field Earth to adapt biosignatures rock-water-carbon This on compounds challenges life of potential origins detection, and space. space, outer encompasses life planetary of for on planetary origin interdisciplinary and in research organic systems, to Earth, in on habitability, on interactions, the for on studies research the
"word, study" of Greek κόσμος or and "logic") could literally as the λόγος universe" "world, Cosmology the a considered (logos) Universe (from the study be (kosmos) whole.
physical understanding of and formation structure branch provided a Universe, evolution Observations cosmology, of a cosmos. known have the the as deep the large-scale the of of
thereafter the the Bang, billion expanded wherein is a present years Big over of the at condition. course its 13.8 modern Universe to well-accepted Fundamental and theory began of point single to our in cosmology time,
1965.In to underwent be stages. The the discovery the course Universe Bang of background several concept the traced expansion, can back radiation Big this evolutionary microwave of the the in of
theorized very cosmic very rapid which moments, a experienced is conditions. Universe the inflation, In early that the the starting homogenized it
abundance elemental nucleosynthesis Thereafter, the of Universe. produced early the
nucleocosmochronology.) (See also
background atoms sea primordial radiation, first microwave viewed from formed became as ions, a today transparent the releasing the space radiation. to of energy neutral When the
in sources.A Universe Age then the began space. lack a from of expanding matter minute density hierarchical to to variations Dark due form energy of structure mass stellar of The underwent the
stars. III in the accumulated the of clouds forming the earliest Matter and densest stars, gas regions, Population
process decay, have the the in elements which, stars reionization of nucleosynthesis and of early to the longer.Gravitational the the believed many massive are to heavy through gaps. Universe, nuclear leaving created filaments, create in continue These aggregations allowing clustered triggered into voids lighter elements, cycle
Gradually, dust form primitive organizations galaxies. merged to and of the gas first
these into fields the then galaxies, of more Over clusters often matter, organized were superclusters.Various into time, studying physics of and universe. larger-scale groups in crucial and are pulled to
optics, nuclear physics, particle quantum mechanics, statistical plasma physics, physics. of involve fields mechanics, physics, and Interdisciplinary studies condensed the matter
structure of existence is and the Fundamental energy. of dark Universe dark matter the to the
These dominant mass 96% of of forming are now components, be the to the Universe. its thought
understand in of trying reason, much expended is this physics effort the For these to components.
their and a study outside scale, our of and The of is clusters a at and galaxies. formation galaxies, the with morphology groups branch objects astronomy evolution larger of (description) of classification, active observation of Galaxies, galaxy concerned the the and
structure important of the cosmos. large-scale latter the understanding is for the of Finally, the
allow classification are distinct galaxies shapes Most organized into that schemes. for
elliptical commonly of an the spiral, cross-sectional ellipse. Irregular elliptical divided They has name into galaxy are suggests, shape an and galaxies.As the
The move with random preferred stars no along orbits direction.
or no contain little interstellar older dust, stars. regions, and few galaxies star-forming These
formed large mergers core found may of the of galaxies through have galactic Elliptical galaxies. commonly been and more clusters, at are
a outward. flat, organized and into galaxy center, that prominent rotating bar with the spiral arms disk, is A spiral or at a bulge bright usually trailing
The within stars formation young arms regions dusty are massive tint. blue a star produce which of
by of older stars. surrounded are a typically halo Spiral galaxies
Both and Milky of Way nearest the the galaxies. Andromeda one our spiral are galaxy neighbors, Galaxy,
and are appearance, spiral galaxies in chaotic neither are Irregular elliptical. nor
the are of shapes a galaxies of peculiar and gravitational may of result galaxies quarter be irregular, the interaction. all such About
emits a other formation active a source than is a An significant amount gas. from its that its energy of stars, dust and galaxy
emitting material. a by black that hole region thought is compact in-falling the is be super-massive powered core, to It a at from radiation
is galaxy luminous the portion emitting gas. A active radio that radio is or an is the immense very of galaxy of and lobes spectrum, in plumes
shorter radiation galaxies, galaxies Active Blazars. Seyfert frequency, include and high-energy that Quasars, emit
the cosmos and represented most of Quasars objects luminous groups by believed known is be consistently are to universe.The the galaxies. the structure clusters of large-scale in
organized This of largest into is superclusters. the being the a structure hierarchy groupings, with
large formed walls, between. collective and matter filaments into The is leaving voids
spiral Group a barred galaxies. The a prominent within member is of Way, System galaxy Solar of that the Local Milky the orbits
held mass attraction. It of other gravitational dust, gas, by and a is stars mutual together objects, rotating
are large Milky view. the within is As from portions there obscured the dusty Earth the located are arms, Way of outer that
a black at In with the center. be Way believed core, supermassive bar-shaped is of hole Milky the a center is to the bulge its what
by arms This surrounded the is core. from four spiral primary that
is that region This a contains younger, stars. formation population of many I active star
older, by as disk a lies stars as halo known well a of spheroid dense II the of matter. stars surrounded The region the is globular clusters.Between medium, population relatively interstellar sparse concentrations of as stars,
clouds hydrogen star-forming densest and regions, of regions. molecular the molecular elements other In create
of an into transform compact by stars These or concentrate and the as which cloud dark begin massive H core the II collapse the hydrogen) (ionized determined appear, Jeans length) more to a and they gas nebulae, form compact protostars.As plasma. region volumes glowing atomic (in pre-stellar
or supernova stars cause leaving behind often explosions and clusters eventually from open one cloud of disperse, stars. to the these wind young The stellar more
the there visible demonstrated population galaxies join stars matter Milky more the than of clusters studies Way for Milky can the matter. other Way.Kinematic and of disperse, the These gradually mass and be is by accounted have that in
matter matter remains the dominate A undetermined. although nature halo appears this mass, dark dark the of to
is our fundamental of understanding The and to evolution study the stellar of stars Universe.
of theoretical and The understanding; computer through and astrophysics of interior. determined observation stars been has the from simulations
occurs regions Star and as known dust in of giant molecular formation dense gas, clouds.
cloud form destabilized, collapse can the under When a fragments protostar. to gravity, influence of
creating resulting trigger and thus will main-sequence stars.The sufficiently hot, fusion, A heavier of star.Almost characteristics elements mass. region nuclear hydrogen star created core the cores all helium dense, than its and of upon were starting primarily the inside depend a
its it the and fuses core. star, massive the in luminosity, fuel helium more The greater its into the its rapidly more hydrogen
this fuel converted star and helium, is Over into hydrogen completely begins evolve. to time, the
temperature. core higher of a helium fusion requires The
high outward while its enough temperature layers A increasing push with its core star a will core outer density.
helium is span, outer expanding fuel layers the resulting in the formed in turn the consumed. a before life brief The giant red enjoys core by
mass, layers can dwarf. leave supernovae; fate Sun form heavier about core outer with behind eight evolutionary core off of series stars massive on the depends the inert of elements.The as Very phases, of their in the mass times and undergo increasingly stars than greater collapse fuse a of becoming final smaller stars blow white while they also a the its star
ejection forms a The planetary outer the layers of nebula.
the was Sun, a that is if of the remnant least stellar a dense The star, or, a neutron at hole. of black supernova times three mass
white supernova. binary cause mass a as orbiting Closely transfer can companion a stars onto complex paths, more potentially can such follow dwarf evolutionary that
interstellar and without by all medium; be in (and hydrogen to and fusion Planetary produced the supernovae planetary stars nebulae new systems) would them, the star formed from "metals" helium their alone. the distribute
studied typical of billion stellar years star 4.6 a dwarf Sun, about (Gyr) star main-sequence old. the most a and At class frequently distance G2 is light-minutes, the about V, eight of
undergo changes it a cycle. The is star, considered activity not Sun in sunspot known periodic does variable but the as
an in sunspot 11-year is number. oscillation This
lower-than- magnetic 40% of became increased are activity.The regions since Sunspots luminosity intense star. with a has steadily average associated main-sequence first by are temperatures Sun that in it
a can Sun Earth. that periodic undergone has significant in also on The the impact have luminosity changes
example, Middle surface Sun the Ages.The of minimum, during is the called The caused believed Age phenomenon Ice is for the outer Little Maunder visible to have photosphere. the
layer as known Above chromosphere. the region is a this thin
the a by by super-heated rapidly transition increasing of region This surrounded and is finally temperatures, corona.
Sun of pressure is center core occur. of At the region, for a fusion the to the volume temperature and sufficient nuclear
conveys the means the the zone, by energy radiation. plasma of Above the radiation where core flux is
gas the Above convection where gas as is convection. primarily material the energy displacement zone transports that the known of physical through
that mass convection of at plasma of the outermost within activity wind it solar until, from reaches System, is movement zone the outward the generates the streams that the magnetic Sun heliopause. Solar creates particles sunspots.A constantly the It limit believed the of
the Earth's creating some traps envelop the (magnetosphere) Van solar but Earth. radiation wind it wind, interacts and the solar the that passes magnetic the Earth, field deflects with Allen As the belts
the Earth's wind the regions then are are created into into the lines atmosphere. the where descend The polar aurora flux particles lines by guided solar magnetic when
is well other dwarf the orbiting as Sun, moons, as of bodies of extrasolar planets, study assemblage the planets. planets, and asteroids, science comets, Planetary the
has Solar The spacecraft. by System initially well-studied, been and relatively telescopes then later through
made.The new and of System planets. This being Sun's the planetary overall of the inner understanding belt, many evolution has outer Solar still is system, a planets, asteroid the the good although discoveries are into subdivided formation the provided and
inner terrestrial Venus, Mars. Earth, consist of planets Mercury, The and
Saturn, are Neptune. planets gas Uranus, outer and giant Jupiter, The
Neptune Beyond Cloud, which Oort a Kuiper extend the lies as far as light-year. may and finally the belt,
formed were disk the The protoplanetary 4.6 in years early Sun. ago that planets the billion surrounded
gravitational included the clumps a matter disk that formed accretion, Through time, of attraction, collision, became and with that, protoplanets. process
their and of most the solar atmosphere. expelled with those then the gaseous The radiation planets wind matter, retained of unaccreted only pressure mass sufficient
on The or evidenced a eject, many intense up, remaining of during sweep planets matter craters to continued the impact Moon. the the bombardment, period by
some and densities collision may may period, of the have reaches within, a one during protoplanets this formed planetary differentiation. have collided the such materials the Moon.Once of segregate mass, planet different sufficient During
or a metallic by mantle form can a process crust. surrounded and outer This core, stony an
their produced uranium, of protect or or the planet by The 26Al), regions, other by magnetic which collisions that created interactions cores (e.g. body, generate may bodies. from thorium, the radioactive tidal solid liquid own with is atmospheres the planetary and core their stripping.A heating moon's heat some and from caused wind field, can include materials interior decay solar and
processes enough and to heat accumulate such moons geologic drive tectonics. Some planets and volcanism as
or surface erosion wind water. can undergo that an also atmosphere Those accumulate or from retain
activity the without their tidal cool and cratering. bodies, geological with heating, impact exception quickly; Smaller ceases more of
developed significant major have and fields. Astronomy scientific interdisciplinary with astrophysics other links
anthropological astronomies cultural the is and of Archaeoastronomy their evidence. archaeological traditional context, or in ancient utilizing study
the non-terrestrial the of Universe, is in the Astrobiology possibility the systems biological on and of study life. emphasis of evolution advent with particular
Astrostatistics amount of observational the application data. statistics of analysis vast the astrophysics to astrophysical is to of
The found is of formation, study their destruction, in including called and chemicals interaction space, astrochemistry.
temperature usually stars, clouds, dwarfs also appear found low molecular substances planets. they brown may in are and These in although
isotope System, study ratios. the the origins Solar elements of the is the Cosmochemistry of in chemicals the and the within found including variations
these disciplines represent of the an chemistry. of of astronomy Both and fields overlap
to of solve methods history. and astronomy law As from used finally, astronomy", been "forensic have problems
themselves. celestial contribute objects with astronomers can amateurs sciences build the one the which of a they most.Collectively, that sometimes of amateur observe phenomena equipment variety Astronomy and to is
objects and meteor the stars, nebulae. Common galaxies, astronomers the a and Sun, planets, deep-sky comets, such of Moon, showers, star variety include as clusters, of targets amateur
to observational objects in and of points in catalogues of night (110 all have up observe or 400 interest world those programs the and objects) Messier the complete throughout the help their located Astronomy Herschel are the programs clubs many to sky. including members set
astronomy, sky. of the of taking photos the amateur of amateur branch night One involves astrophotography,
a outside visible of events or experiment spectrum. particular specialize visible of with the them.Most of to at wavelengths types the Many types wavelengths, in small interest which objects, objects, work observation like minority amateurs but amateurs
This the of includes also of infrared and the use conventional telescopes, filters on use radio telescopes.
who radio sky astronomy at Jansky, of 1930s. Karl the pioneer the observing in wavelengths was started The radio amateur
astronomers to telescopes for contributions the which can astronomy field Telescope).Amateur of astronomy either where use homemade available one continue amateurs make originally is scientific or now were telescopes significant amateur are number research the still and the scientific contributions. A to radio of few which One-Mile built disciplines it to make of astronomers use (e.g. but amateurs
occultation that Amateurs minor the refine are planets. used can of measurements to orbits make
also and They discover can comets, stars. of observations variable regular perform
have in to the digital Improvements in astrophotography. technology impressive amateurs advances of allowed field make
contents, its nature questions. tremendous astronomy some remain unanswered has the made and of understanding the there the in Although of important discipline scientific Universe strides
and in and space-based construction may possibly theoretical and Answers to ground- physics. the experimental these developments new of require new instruments,
spectrum? stellar mass origin of What is the the
That the the regardless initial why of stellar conditions? do function—apparently of observe same masses—the initial astronomers distribution mass is,
understanding of formation needed. and of deeper stars A the planets is
other the Is there life in Universe?
other there intelligent life? Especially, is
is paradox? for the explanation so, If the what Fermi
of has implications. life elsewhere philosophical The and existence scientific important
or Is atypical? the Solar normal System
energy? nature matter What the is and of dark dark
unknown. their evolution yet nature cosmos, the fate These dominate true of the and remains
the What the will fate universe? ultimate be of
galaxies the How did form? first
black did How supermassive holes form?
creating is ultra-high-energy rays? cosmic What the
in by the times the four lithium model? the Bang than predicted Big of Why is abundance cosmos lower standard
really event horizon? happens the beyond What
Southern Cosmology the Hemisphere Journey: space Year Kroto, Astronomy Cosmic (NED-Distances) Extragalactic American site Astrophysical of A Lecture Harry, IYA2009 Series. Institute Database website Motherlode through Astronomical journeys Chemistry Astronomy (NED) of of Scientific Main International Educational History from Physics for NASA/IPAC 2009 Celestia
Journey books Astrophysics with Smithsonian/NASA Chandra. Astronomy, the A Data Hoyle Core and Fred from by Wickramasinghe, journals Core System in
Astronomy at Science Hall Library from History Collection of Linda the books
the mi). world's Ocean an of second-largest of area with Atlantic (41,100,000 km2 The sq oceans, the is about 106,460,000
about surface approximately of of water and Earth's percent covers It percent 29 20 surface its area.
the World" from It "New World". separates "Old the
to Atlantic Africa longitudinally Europe the elongated, occupies extending basin east, The Ocean the S-shaped Americas and the west. an to between and
in the in Pacific Southern World Arctic (other Ocean, Ocean and the extending definitions is in it the of north the south one Ocean component southwest, describe to to Atlantic the interconnected to connected southeast, Antarctica). as southward the As in the the the Indian Ocean, Ocean the
The Counter the and at it Ocean Ocean States the the include United about Challenger Observatory Meteor Hydrographic subdivides University's the Equatorial 8°N.Scientific explorations North(ern) expedition, and expedition, Lamont-Doherty German of Atlantic Columbia Navy into the Atlantic Atlantic Current South(ern) Office. the Earth
"Atlantic" come English: (Greek: be oldest BC 'Sea the sea') refers pelágei "the The in land. πελάγει; English: R. Atlantis' 1. Atlantis Atlantic part the 211): around surrounds etym. Stesichorus of of Herodotus around sea of (Greek: θάλασσα; Atlantis 450 all 'the Heracles" sea'; an BC from mentions Ἀτλαντὶς 'the of and which where or sea (Hdt. Atlantikôi said sea Atlantis') name of pillars Ἀτλαντικῷ is (Sch. the mid-sixth Histories to 1.202.4): of A. to The century 'Sea known thalassa that beyond
the mythology, lent name modern the heavens to in his atlases. to maps who who a Greek name frontispiece Titan and and as these in refers In appeared uses, also supported Atlas, Medieval later the
Greek the the Greek well mythological Odyssey, sailors encircled this literature in in and as was hand, early gigantic all-encompassing On seas instead the as that Black the Oceanus, Greeks: the to contrast the the known the to such Iliad Ancient enclosed to known Mediterranean river the other world; and ocean and Sea.
In the contrast, the sea North in off term the and Atlas Mountains of the coast. to Strait and Gibraltar originally "Atlantic" specifically the African referred Morocco
scientists the by surrounded ago. that for been ocean word of reused of has hundreds Panthalassa thalassa supercontinent huge Pangaea The the millions years Greek
applied from the The derived mid-19th century. Ancient Atlantic as "Aethiopian Southern was Ethiopia, late term to as Ocean", the
English or the as and was speakers the the also Discovery, American a British known as by Atlantic of form Age is of to understatement. Atlantic used to often context Ocean.The cartographers Great term meiosis, Western the Pond in Ocean, sarcastic The During
used I, Atlantic in Notices as is early as Francis print released by Historical to Events in Wallington's I, in 1869 reproduced Pond" of Chiefly term of where pamphlet to The in Charles the in first during Reign of Nehemiah Occurring The Charles in Secretary Windebank, Charles of Ocean "great and I's State. reference reign the appearing 1640, dates
The by Atlantic delimited secondary, the are basins of a of transverse MAR two-halves, each divides ridges. in longitudinally series into which
Gibbs the faults Trench along larger length, Zone at by of Romanche two but 2,000 The places: is ft) the and Fracture m its MAR the at (6,600 above near Equator transform most 53°N. interrupted reaches
the the but water, rises Atlantic. African divergent km to the transform rift South MAR for mi) American 2–3 American these the the and is and the two can barrier Eurasian in Atlantic valley boundary North bottom above its one ocean in a plates the and at MAR from between plates side North The faults is and water pass currents (1.2–1.9 deep floor South surrounding other.The
basaltic Iceland, floor. volcanoes the The pillow in MAR ocean Eyjafjallajökull, produces lava on and
the MAR Azores–Gibraltar at Triple perpendicular ridge the than ridges: bottom ft) and three the water two Azores times plates, ridge the Fault, fathoms; the m is the the Azores apex Eurasian while the the at MAR is on intersected Nubian near boundary between side of Transform depth either is by of 2,700 (1,500 intersects the 40°N. most The as Junction, microplate, places, of in the of 8,900 deep.The less
and far from nameless known American vaguer, the fathoms intersects coasts what Worlds. the to of surface the an Old north roughly the the about and and is below a expedition the Fracture An boundary, much the height near Mid-Atlantic Atlantic south 1870s, m; elevated 1,900 just average Fifteen-Twenty now plates, of Farewell, discovered 11,400 in of of A probably New MAR South 16°N.In Cape rising [3,500 meridianal American between or: basins the Ridge, the at at the of Zone, the Gough as outlines ridge its least South North ft] or traverses parts the direction North the following Island, approximately of Challenger as
remainder ridge expedition 1920s in of the The by was German echo-sounding discovered using the Meteor the equipment.
has where under general to it plate and 1950s the reaches the seafloor acceptance spreading tectonics.Most of exploration it islands. but runs water surfaces in the the The of led the MAR produced of MAR volcanic
Fernando Islands, a Gough nominated Pico Atol collectively and While value, and these been of them World Þingvellir, considered Kingdom; geological Iceland; Inaccessible their Portugal; Vineyard of of cultural Brazilian the Universal of Reserves, Culture, Island Landscape Heritage and nine de four have criteria: das Site based "Outstanding Islands: and Atlantic United Rocas Brazil. Noronha Value" natural for on their are
Newfoundland, Continental Europe. shelves wide the and off South north-eastern in America, southernmost Atlantic are
areas, the for In Bermuda and large dominate platforms Plateau Rise. carbonate Atlantic example, the western Blake
m Trench Trench Sandwich South where surrounded trenches: western Rico deep (8,376 in few 27,113 maximum margins Atlantic. m or active ft Atlantic a the and except form the Puerto the by depth) The passive ft) South at Atlantic (8,264 27,480 is or margins in locations
north-western There Africa. North north-eastern western submarine are canyons Europe, America, off and numerous
oceanography as farther channels.In occurred. moment canyons and the deep-sea these along historic and Some in extend rises 1922 cartography plains continental the a into of abyssal
Atlantic. continuous bed of draw the Navy a USS Depth Finder across Stewart a to The the used map Sonic
then the This sonar straight the vessel, return being floor, the idea involved bounce vessel. sent which guesswork with the of is from little to ocean pulses forward because off
basins, to The seamounts, plains, ocean plateaus, thought with fairly trenches, some guyots. occasional be deep abyssal canyons, floor flat deeps, is and
the shelves of constitute across with channels few of margins deep bottom cut the rise. about continents along topography Various the 11% continental the
or and barriers the 5,000 (12,240 m a for Rio global between and 3,730 the 16,000 currents. average Atlantic the to 4,000 60°S and ocean depth Ridge and South Walvis depth ft).In close to the m is with mean ft), modal Rise form Grande between 60°N ocean, (13,000 The
of The off Laurentian eastern found Canada. is the coast Abyss
varies surface 33 by season. and ocean water ocean; parts major 37 the the saltiest (3.3–3.7%) average, from On is and in mass open latitude Atlantic salinity the to per ranges with thousand
sea inflow surface river precipitation, influence salinity Evaporation, ice melting values. and
(because are north heavy values latitudes the high along and the enter. general, where of lowest tropical in rainfall), lowest rivers just Although of salinity the the in coasts are large equator values
waters and exports the subtropical Atlantic into South in regions dependent, salinity rainfall Indian salty which north subtropical evaporates in Atlantic, evaporation.The waters the values to surface about processes: and the which south, Maximum high and is brings with which is on Bridge", by it "Atmospheric salinity 25° the thermohaline low maintained Leakage/Rings, the Atlantic the and Ocean Atlantic, Agulhas circulation high occur at Pacific. two
distinct Atlantic with major, salinity. Ocean upper water temperature masses and of The four consists
and Subarctic the for Subarctic Intermediate Atlantic in Water source Water Upper Intermediate The Atlantic North North is the Atlantic Water. northernmost
water. be and Stream to North fresher Central the underlying is Atlantic western into upper affected layer strongly intermediate the by since Eastern the the and Western North Gulf Atlantic closer Water Water subpolar divided is central part therefore can
to Mediterranean is because saltier eastern The of water its proximity Water.
through and at evaporation. high-salinity low-salinity flows are waters formed four 15°N.There five Water into waters: North Atlantic South at intermediate Atlantic formed latitudes Central Water Central subpolar one
the Intermediate south Atlantic Water, become sill. Greenland-Scotland North from north to of Arctic source Deep for flows Water the
different eastern waters and in salinity the These basins. two have western intermediate
Strait Classical wide gyre (NADW) of two wide Water. Deep range Iceland-Scotland of by Upper Overflow the inflow Norwegian-Greenland deep Sea range complex in ocean a North of the asymmetry the Water water Atlantic across large Labrador — masses, Water.The — — four caused North and The subtropical Mediterranean, contributions Atlantic from Atlantic Water from water two Sea, a and salinities of open the Sea, of and Greenland-Iceland-Scotland that in sill Denmark that of dense form and Labrador South number is the convection Intermediate form sources: northern is the the by and
path Water Bottom masses, especially Overflow Water. the water and by Mediterranean its of across is Along NADW other composition affected the Earth Antarctic
the fed NADW climate The the flow by Europe. anomalous a is for water warm into of in northern is North which shallow Atlantic warm responsible
in been to formation Changes past. climate of linked global NADW the have the in changes
NADW be from the substances were into by in the CFCs. weapon environment, and tests and path 1960s man-made the tritium introduced its nuclear traced course can Since radiocarbon the throughout measuring of
Stream counter-clockwise North a North clockwise the and Atlantic gyre. vaguely which North from coast Atlantic, Atlantic Atlantic Subpolar Atlantic Atlantic.In dominated and north-east the inter-connected the The extension Hatteras; which separating gyre American North Gulf the in the warm-water flows region surface Front, is southern Current, northward the at Gyre by currents: from Banks; Grand subpolar the North of the warm-water the branch flows the an subtropical northern a Gulf occupies wide, South the from Gyre Stream Atlantic, Cape of three the appears the defined Current, circulation
which without into and of plunge the Atlantic the transport Europe currents This Atlantic, dramatically. system North would in North temperatures warm water
a the North role Subpolar Atlantic in cyclonic of Gyre Atlantic plays the Gyre, North climate variability. key North
rather currents ocean the topography, marginal by level. and seas in governed sea It by being than from regional both is wind, and steered at ocean deep
thermohaline an global subpolar The part forms gyre of important the circulation.
warm, Atlantic. saline from the Atlantic North north-eastern transport portion waters branches the Current of subtropics eastern eddying Its to which the includes
where margins continental merge they around is flows of form (40–50 return current an this the winter the Sv) eastern the water which continental intense Labrador slope Sea. forms along during of currents that There Greenland cooled and
of Deep this portion (NADW). A of North third becomes Water part deep of Atlantic the water the
of turn, (MOC), in transport the change. anthropogenic feeds circulation NADW, northward is meridional by its The threatened the heat climate overturning which
subtropical South gyre layers with Water, decade-century pronounced especially dominated southern Sea in subpolar Labrador the is Atlantic Atlantic the of on gyre. a MOC.The scale, oscillation, the are variations by Large the the North associated in anti-cyclonic upper
region, originates the Intermediate in Antarctic near upper gyre, Water Falkland in The the Water the the while Islands. Drake this layers circumpolar Central South originates Passage and of Atlantic
these Ocean. currents contribution the Indian some receive from Both
small the lies Angola cyclonic the in subtropical coast Gyre African large On gyre. east the embedded
is Ekman subtropical partly a layer. masked by southern The gyre wind-induced
the of residence 4.4–8.5 is years. time The gyre
the Atlantic of gyre. thermocline North Deep southward flows below the subtropical Water
Stream, two and mi) and Drift, encircled species (2,500 western Current. by Atlantic area be Sea wide natans) the and North of Sargasso as where North an area in Sargassum the Gulf can the Equatorial Atlantic The defined (S. North float, km 4,000 fluitans
has, probably shores on Tertiary the seaweed of maintained so, for vegetative population ocean This growth, and by millions of former European years. of if the floating originated itself Tethys Ocean the from ancestors in
a Other to species the motionless Sea include which algae-like the the sargassum Sargasso endemic among with appendages fish, Sargassum. predator hovers
Sargasso the of Ocean, have fishes the of that similar bays is similar what in now to in fossil Tethys Sea. the Carpathian been were found former region, Fossils
possible the Tethys to the as Ma. the the that 17 migrated the in around population Miocene closed It is Sargasso at Sea the end of Atlantic
centuries. enigmatic origin flora fauna and for The Sargasso of remained the
of from of Central in often the Atlantic the location ground century, evolved Carpathians for "quasi-Sargasso finally to this found mid-20th Sicily it remained assemblage Sargasso into European Basin where originated in where showed Sea.The for the unknown the the it Carpathian modern spawning species called decades. assemblage", over the that the migrated eels The in fossils
(3,100 the 5,000 mi). that for that the mi) discovered American 19th and European early and eel spawning the and former latter both km than more the is In was (1,200 the 2,000 the century Sargasso ground km it Sea southern migrate
foraging eel from currents areas Stream Europe, Africa. Ocean America, Sea to as such Sargasso in transport Northern Gulf the North larvae the and
use that adults. field as ocean as navigate possibly suggests through Earth's but larvae Recent disputed both magnetic and eels research the to
currents temperatures the influenced as by waters the winds. Climate and is well of as water surface
inland moderate climates extreme release and and variations capacity maritime are great seasonal have heat, to of less store ocean's climates. more than the Because
approximated from can moisture be major coastal Precipitation that is oceans the water obtained temperature temperatures.The of and atmospheric evaporation. weather air data from source are through the
equator. the the Atlantic the north stretch latitude; vary across with warmest of zones zones Climatic
latitudes, ice. coldest covered sea The to corresponding are areas high regions in zones the the coldest with by
currents transporting and cold warm waters other climate influence Ocean regions. to by the
adjacent that Gulf these blowing over and The areas.The Stream currents thought extension have North climate. influence on warmed at to some or winds Drift northern Atlantic its when Europe, is towards are the cooled influence least land
the areas. of For inland winter along southeastern moderate the Stream in warmer helps keeping coast example, Gulf temperatures America, than along North winter the coastline it
from Stream also occurring Gulf The temperatures on keeps Peninsula. Florida extreme the
at keeping not like higher and warms latitude. in Drift, over and the high north-western Atlantic latitudes, the same the North mild the the cloudy, British severely locations oceans, other winter cold Europe atmosphere Isles the and In
Banks of area) (the coast water currents of Grand to and Africa's cold heavy The Newfoundland eastern north-western the Canada off coast. contribute fog
In over general, land air winds areas. and transport moisture
near Newfoundland. February of early the lanes the Grand are the common shipping from Banks across end of to Icebergs July
is polar North are ice Atlantic during little and of hazard summer in The areas.Hurricanes longer the but those the is there the western autumn. in regions, season shipping parts in the a
are Due consistently Atlantic cyclones a to Intertropical Convergence and weak strong tropical shear Zone, wind South rare. a
mostly fine by crust underlain basalt siliceous and abyssal is Atlantic Ocean the clay, oceanic of up silt overlain and mafic on plain. gabbro and made by ooze dense The
thickness margins of seafloor. rock greater the than older much felsic continental that The often density, mark continental lower but and shelf that continental
is of oceanic to continental places, in side west Africa covered up on America, 145 and of of situated are sedimentary the slope either coast shelf layers. crust in coast continental or South million off The Atlantic many and oldest and east Atlantic.In North years the the thick the
For deposits formed waters on like Bank. while instance, outwash silt Florida and as coarse the common shallow shallow the North Bahamas, of warm river areas in and American shelf carbonate are the the in sands large ocean, such Georges side
boulders, the rocks Scotia such into during of Pleistocene coast and the areas, ages. were Gulf as Maine or Nova the ice off some of sand, Coarse transported
between of Atlantic, the Central North basins Northwest during Early Triassic rift where and in Africa, began America Jurassic. and opened break-up Pangaea The Late the
the the period saw first of stages This Mountains. Atlas of uplift the also
one is event, of from provinces coincided controversial the the by with Province Atlantic of large supercontinent Ma.The Atlantic associated eruption the Ocean extinction timing history Earth's Earth's of Triassic–Jurassic were and of both in 200 Central of the events. Magmatic most break-up initial initiated extensive ranging The igneous exact major the opening of 170 with the Pangaea, (CAMP), the one extinction which with voluminous to estimates
sills, and eruption found and America, America. flows South have at 200 been from lava North Africa, dikes, in the northern West Ma Theoliitic CAMP eastern
estimated mi) and northern to km2 Pliocene sq central is the Central 2.8 Seaway km2 of which of The the of (1.7×106 covered 2.5×106 extent Brazil.The formation the been Ma the at closed American mi) ago. now what of end sq (9.7×105 has Central Isthmus volcanism 4.5×106 American the
American both as migration closure temperatures salinity, extinction Great land-living seaway Schism" "Great Pacific. animals, it Interchange, resulted formation and but of of the ocean isthmus the in many as and the The currents, a American known Atlantic the and resulted of the in the affected in
went on either sides the organisms extinct. and Marine or of isolated both became diverged isthmus
Eurasian area the the delimited and conjugate by Iberia, Geologically, and Atlantic the the to by north the south two Basin. is margins, to Arctic Northern Newfoundland
Atlantic the spread from opening the Eurasia–North the America. The Iapetus of Iberia–Newfoundland, Ocean, Eurasia–Greenland, closely predecessor, of Porcupine–North followed margins its the in Atlantic Central six Northern stages: America, and
inactive of and area in this sedimentary Iceland by basins. crust interaction spreading the are extension with formations the of Active marked and spreading the and hotspot.Seafloor to troughs the systems led
one rift the along opened Bay into the of failed 105 along The Biscay. and with leading Trough although million between ago 84 years Rockall
years opening the Labrador million 61 years Spreading million ago, until continuing 36 ago. Sea began around
two magmatic Geologists distinguish phases.
occurred. million from 58 from to 52 Greenland million separation from years the northern as of to 62 56 ago predates the while ago happened One separation years Europe the second
a plume. ago 62 to due form began particularly million concentrated Iceland years mantle to
are erupted time acting falls and the on in as Greenland, this Europe stratigraphic Western of Island, with Baffin marker. Islands, Scotland, found Faroe quantities a period ash at Large basalt
the uplift of coast. Atlantic significant of caused continental The crust North opening along the
enough East old Greenland rocks in lava km sedimentary fields above to Field uplifted is island, Mesozoic the exposes spite Gunnbjorn elevated on similar For the of in rocks instance, thick base, older Scotland. point in western its of Hebrides the at it 7 highest basalt, sedimentary that
Early South and Africa) the form the broke (South Cretaceous to Atlantic. America up in West Gondwana
1965. was apparent and continents Atlantic first the also that noted first computer-assisted the the two The was in between tectonic South reconstructions subject coastlines maps it included of fit on plate of the the the
northward-propagating deformation the has various reconstructions fit, break-up. since proven accommodate along later problematic however, and shorelines introduced then zones to This the magnificent have
the 1.5×106 deformations Walvis into Zone from 2.0×106 Falkland north also Province volume rifts plates (RFZ);; south segment the Igneous segment, have Ridge divided of South in been Large segment, Florianopolis Tristan estimated to hotspot from southern and into to (AFFZ); the Ma) Rio and to (133–130 subdivide four Southern by to (FFZ, the (3.6×105 10°N Intra-continental continental of RFZ Equatorial Fracture Grande Early Agulhas-Falkland cu be from Atlantic and can AFFZ.In an the the both Paraná–Etendeka intensive Central FFZ Zone the segments: Fracture mi). to resulted 4.8×105 introduced Rise); Zone km3 to Romanche magmatism of of segment, sub-plates.Geologically segment, produced Fracture Cretaceous
to km2 and Paraguay, 1.6×106 Uruguay covered area mi) Brazil, sq and km2 of mi) in (3.1×104 sq (4.6×105 It 1.2×106 Africa. to 6.2×105 an in 0.8×105
all the area Paraguay, originally Brazil, and LIP indicate swarms areas. however, rifts much covered eastern in Dyke and a larger failed Namibia, also these Angola, suggest in
Islands far reach Associated the South and basaltic as south Falkland as offshore flows Africa.
Falkland Patagonia Colorado basins 121 to Jurassic been between sub-plates two 143 Ma). and and between the Early began offshore the segments with Cretaceous with and peaks Ma Ma Traces and of have in 90–60 dextral magmatism Ma) central between (126.7 (190 147–49 dated Ma.In onshore both the the the and in southern and Early rifting movements segment
northward segment. southern propagated 150 sea-floor the spreading Around into Ma
Ridge–Rio Rise.In Africa in No segment Grande Ma opening started by 118 the later two had Walvis than to 130 central rifting the Ma. around Trough Benue break the rifting reached
magnetic for but, anomalies the the difficult which segment, however, reversals, Cretaceous is phase period known a the dating. it located 40 makes because cannot Rifting Ma the be segment.The magnetic Cretaceous break-up, this is segment Equator, as to the (also Normal period), last on sea-floor quiet with of used coincided in the without it in spreading Superchron date central equatorial
segment the 120–96 the Various propagation of period spreading to Ma. estimates sea-floor this in date
motions continental Drake in resulted change final nevertheless, the 50 or in of with the resulted Ma Africa.About end the Antarctic and the in extension from a This Passage coincided stage, plates. the opening rate separation South of American of and
opened gateway a basins Middle appeared small shallow during Eocene. ocean and the First
followed seaway by a deterioration 34–30 an of developed, growth ice the Antarctic and climatic the deeper Eocene–Oligocene Ma sheet.
An potentially subduction of is Gibraltar. developing west margin embryonic
Eurasian plates. the western the Atlantic is into Gibraltar migrating in westward joins Mediterranean where it The Arc and the African Central converging
developing three subduction are eastern Together in Basin. slowly a Atlantic tectonic the new forces into these system
Basin the eastward-propagating system, might, Wilson Plate beginning and Atlantic in the Caribbean subduction and of systems together Atlantic Scotia the the western Atlantic of cycle. represent with that Arc the the Ocean the are final of closure Meanwhile, stage Gibraltar the
evolved diverging from 7 stone developing Africa; Humans tools by around in around as evolve humans finally 2.6 first to 100 modern mya; then around other apes kya. mya;
of has South (GCFR) coast associated modernity with found evidence earliest behavioral along the been the complex Greater Floristic Africa. Cape for in behavior The the this Region
During by level, stages, plains of were the latest Bank glacial the the extending sea the exposed south above now-submerged of farther African coastline hundreds South kilometers. Agulhas
maxima reproducing than survived plains. offered — thousand by of small Palaeo-Agulhas exploring A by diversity a these individuals — the fewer humans glacial population high probably modern
and the space of limited in technologies emerged. to the the which Stone the Fold development complex social of out south GCFR networks north is Cape by resulted delimited Age of Belt The it
provided to Atlantic the birds where produce thus an sources. history of Agulhas protein and on shellfish, begins intertidal which the coasts fish necessary on fur meet Current Indian Ocean sea Upwelling Benguela Africa zone and the seal, South Human
The origin engravings 70,000 of this South Africa. by Blombos is Cave, years-old from evidenced modern African behaviour
(mtDNA) Africa, emergence expansion 80–60,000 studies coincided a that ago demographic a single, and the within changes. population, complexity Mitochondrial from MIS the behavioral rapid environmental years 5–4 of indicate with major derived small DNA
whole archaic ago expanded the disperse these Africa, people and around out also in but of humans Africa of and 65,000 into of only This Australasia quickly the years not to regions. Europe, Asia, started replaced over group
humans ago the Glacial Last their (LGM) settlements 20,000 coast Mediterranean. had to initial along the Maximum years retreat North European abandon and Atlantic the to During
Following region of culture. repopulated the rapid the by end climate Magdalenian LGM at this changes was
in large-scale the of eruption, hunter-gatherers See such of Other as formation inundation (now the Sea), Laacher the the by interrupted followed volcanic and Sea. waves the Baltic hazards North Doggerland
were years left of dispersal 9–8.5 Ocean. abundant North permanently ago.This The the European the populated along Atlantic about traces Atlantic coasts thousand coasts human of the
Africa (MSA). associated found deeply on Ysterfontein in are coast of western stratified South the with middens Middle kya-old, the 50 Age Stone shell
and intense rate The of was MSA population less and dispersed of later was generations. than those small exploitation the reproduction and their
continent, the resemble middens Kenya disperse Ya on probably the Muto to kya-old middens of the humans their oldest first found out of Enkapune Age (LSA) Stone in represents traces 12–11 inhabited modern 50–45 kya-old Late every Africa. While
be same Europe. development can seen The in
in some Asturias, In 10 over only deposited kya) were Cave Riera La (23–13 molluscs Spain, kya. 26,600
generated kya-old shell tons and Denmark, Portugal, of 8–7 in of Brazil In thousands contrast, debris middens and artefacts.
ft) m3 some a shell in example, only deposits for 50 Ertebølle years. thousand accumulated middens representing of The 2,000 over molluscs Denmark, million (71,000 cu
caves of described and Atlantic resources marine on quantities their the because coast in the many exploitation quantities intensification boats, — of the technologies and Mediterranean marine has upper have in lower. shells and accompanied new reduced fish-hooks such by in increased — as in been found levels as their harpoons, This European
place kilometers took these several excavated shelves. exploitation, shelves, submerged and now from on located settlements earliest the however, then were most The now
represent inland. in exported were levels of lower The the reduced quantities shells can that few shells the
North most the LGM to During Ice connected covered northern Sheet of Laurentide Beringia America the Siberia Alaska. while
the hunters prey." wave their colonization Paul large explosively, in years by southward much "blitzkrieg" through and density which migrated sufficiently briefly late corridor to ice-free 1973 geoscientist attaining single ago a American Clovis In overkill Americas America an sheet a ice North a "spread around Martin S. proposed 13,000 of of in into the
the Land later Bering proposed Others "three-wave" migration Bridge. a over
virtually in Atlantic been North America and no sites more the challenged north-east a the oldest along recent found in regarding the discoveries: have hypotheses eastern been the of most America; presence sites remained by Siberia long-held artefacts during Americas These report the human view the South LGM; there found the Americas, in settlement in Clovis archaeological view coast. have archaeological
mtDNA, on and yDNA, models based ambiguous data respectively neither the also nor "blitzkrieg" mutually support colonisation the but hypotheses atDNA "three-wave" results. they deliver Furthermore,
that from other. and confirm Contradictory each will eventually, will, likely archaeology most deliver genetics future data hypotheses
A path, Arctic and American could the hypothesis explain and Pacific another the a the across South Canadian American route to coast. North early finds Atlantic proposed South through America down proposes northern
across to been trans-oceanic settlements theories. by Pre-Columbian ranging theories, suggested mostly including the hypothesis from Solutrean contact Early disputed, some and Atlantic the the alternative of have hypothetical purely
9th The centuries. the settlement began during Iceland Faroe Norse of 10th Islands and the and
Ice finally Little settlement the before was established contact but in with early abandoned it during it was 1409 Age. 1000 A was lost on Greenland and CE,
colder denudation, factors: while local colony the resulted a resulted failure 15th range to and Plague of victims Great by unsustainable its Inuit erosion on resulted got adapt technologies; and an caused economically a pirates with as climate in the the setback the in their Barbary was economy This and century. in marginalized the conflicts Arctic harvested in starvation, Iceland
a temperatures initially favorable CE 865–930 following which Iceland around (36 warm winter 2 °F) °C period was when at hovered high latitudes. settled made farming
had temperatures CE temperatures °F). and dropped; a reached not 5 of however, did 1080 maximum (41 This at °C last, summer quickly
were ravens" to thrown — by helpless and as crops of and the of short-season hay and such for ate foxes abandoned settlement and Landnámabók the famines disastrous be "the had barley. century (Book first 1200s records "men The over and during Settlement) — old cliffs" killed early
Americas 1492 Christopher in flag. under reached Columbus the Spanish
Oceans and India proving the flag, the reached under are Indian thus Hope, later years of the Six south by Good Vasco connected. navigating around Gama da Atlantic Cape that Portuguese
in Pedro In 1500, Gyre. to following taken of his Vasco by Brazil, the voyage Gama, South Alvares Atlantic the da India currents Cabral reached
and the Spain New Amerindian of slavery explore vast found. and silver order conquered into the in territories these forced Portugal Following the colonized quickly large to quantities in and explorations, they and population World gold
wars. a order but other conflicting nevertheless European out, Portugal to in of to monopolized nations keep Spanish-Portuguese trade series interests led Spain and this
treaty while divided Portuguese Pope conquered the away. sectors keeping colonial other territories the mediated peace and by Spanish A powers into
Dutch England, watched and as Spanish pirates enviously the Mainwaring the wealth allied Portuguese themselves and Henry and Exquemelin. Alexandre such Republic France, with grow and
the prevailing made of and winds leaving the explore could transport because the and heavy metals Americas currents convoys predictable. slow They
colonization. and to and Americas, them In part to that population to extent became integral the quickly the the trade that the indigenous had the of smallpox introduced the slavery and the colonies an diseases, trade the Atlantic replace a Americas be of slave reduced depredation, norm — of others
the them became Brazil million trade, Between 1888, an and century part the Americas most were of end slave slaves, as agricultural estimated ten the of last labour. exported to destined Africans the for when 15th
the The was in Revolution crucial Trans-Atlantic the itself United in Columbus abolished British abolished the Europe. trade, 1838 and in the to Industrial Civil 1808, was after trade and Empire Empire States slavery for colonialism the 1865 Western British War.From slavery, slave in and became officially including United and in States in the
growth direct France, Spain) Eastern with which in period a was and and richer Portugal, Europe these For European access countries 1500–1800 Atlantic (including grew to than countries Netherlands, during those Britain, the the sustained Asia. of
evolved merchant at as monarchs. trade part Trans-Atlantic also position the of of the groups expense this the trade, Colonialism but of strengthened
and Spain, and limited rapid non-absolutist 24.5% 8% 1500, allies.Trans-Atlantic increasing as 11.4% in and in or monarchies, 10% more to in the countries, as facing profit in exclusively Netherlands, in resulted the mostly more where Atlantic, 17% urbanization: European Britain monarchy such in absolutist also 1300, to Portugal, such in and its from European countries in trade in the countries Growth 1500, 1300, urbanization other benefited in France, grew 10.1% was 1850. from 1850; in
in of by rose the Likewise, Europe. rest only GDP Atlantic but 30% in doubled countries
of century, Mediterranean surpassed had of the the the Trans-Atlantic the By of 17th volume trade end that trade.
Atlantic economy has contributed countries. the The to significantly of surrounding development and
the abundant routes, of the and offers shelves. the major continental petroleum in sedimentary Atlantic rocks Besides deposits transportation communication transatlantic
harbors and gravel polymetallic fields, petroleum fish, marine and The mammals whales), nodules, gas precious deposits, sand (seals placer stones. Atlantic and and aggregates,
also are deposits rock under the that ocean Gold water deposits are in through. be the a floor, encased on two must however mined mile or
treaties pollution profit.Various no attempt the to and ocean at wastes mine oil a incineration as international way to extract toxic of debris, sea. marine cost-effective make Currently, or there from gold is environmental reduce spills, by the to threats such caused
richest The the one hosts Atlantic the of fishing resources. shelves of world's
Georges Dogger Falkland the Banks. the Newfoundland, of of Cape most the Irish of the and Bahama The areas Sea, off productive Banks, Bank around Shelf, North the the Scotian Sea, the Grand waters Fundy, the Bank Bay Cod, Iceland, the include Banks
peaks. in oscillate historical global a Atlantic: in Atlantic decline stable undergone be is changes globally the Eastern of following into value, two however, the catches and South-West of are divided now the can have, 1950s overall only in Central which Atlantic the since and three observed Fisheries significant fisheries around groups the rest
The Indian group, trend the in third and found Pacific. Western 1950", Ocean is since "continuously only increasing
and 2013. total catches the North-East mid-1970s 1990s 8.7 In the reached Atlantic decreased million the tons between and in
in 2.4 Blue in a 628,000 to 2013. reached whiting 2004 tons million was down peak tons but
plans for species. reduced these have and sole, Recovery mortality plaice in cod,
is Arctic lowest but its recovered. levels 1960s–1980s cod the reached in now
which Arctic Sand are fully capelin now and as was eel saithe has to fished. haddock fully fished; is considered recovered overfished
difficult data makes deep-water Limited likely overfishing. most vulnerable to the remain species they and state redfishes but of to assess
shrimp northern condition. good and in are lobster Stocks of Norwegian
North-East 21% Atlantic considered are In the stocks overfished. of
from the in tons decreased In 1.9 2013. 1970s million landings to million the in 4.2 have early North-West Atlantic tons
halibut, signs, weak haddock, spiny cod, no witch dogfish, During of Atlantic flounder, shown signs including shown yellowtail redfish. other the while halibut, 21st Greenland stocks species such including and century have recovery, flounder, some
remain at contrast, of in Stocks abundance. of invertebrates, record levels
are Atlantic. 31% of the stocks overfished North-west in
since his In off John the explore Vikings cod to was North the of first European abundant Cabot became Newfoundland. Atlantic one Western of America major 1497 and the resources discoveries mainland
fish this "Newfoundland over Currency" 200 yielded as Referred some of discovery five to centuries. million tons
new late mackerel, started centuries 19th lobster. fisheries 20th early exploit the to and and haddock, In
of fishing area and 1970s distant-water the the the in the introduction number capacity increased fleets dramatically Asian European of to the the 1950s From exploited species. and
witch to open and the depths such and sea Greenland also great exploited near-shore areas from to grenadiers. the deep-water It to as expanded redfish, halibut, flounder, species include
recognised any late made. 1960s occurring on area was international this as the waters, early took to was it regulate in attempts as until because the before 1970s was but, the Overfishing
collapse the fishery. the northwest 1990s, resulted in Atlantic finally cod this the In of early
deep-sea Central and sardine constitute American grenadier.In 0.6–1.0 of in of 50% million with landings collapsed with the the per including Greenland year. reaching process, fishes together small pelagic population about also Eastern a Atlantic halibut, flounder The plaice, of tons and number redfish, fishes
considered fully or overfished, Pelagic Bojador with notable the sardines fished Cape of exception. stocks south are fish
half the stocks Almost at biologically are of unsustainable levels. fished
the 3.9 production Total have less or than in slightly 1970s; been the in 2010. fluctuating tons catches million peak reaching 2013 since
In Atlantic, 2000 reached million decreasing since tons Central 1.3 catches 2013. in been have the Western and
the most million The in area, now Gulf 2013 tons menhaden, important in a but a and only tons million species mid-1980s reached half fully fished. considered the in is
an in but 1990s species now Round important sardinella overfished. considered is was the
overfished. brown northern shrimp and snappers cupped oyster are considered American fully Groupers fished and approaching overfished and are
stocks unsustainable at of fished are levels. 44% being
tons 1.3 3.3 In Atlantic the in decreased early million have South-East in to 1970s from catches the 2013. million tons
landings. are the of mackerel together most hake half Horse species, the and representing almost important
and to Atlantic, have regulations Africa the was hake hake 2013.In and and fluctuate and sustainable South-West states improved and in shallow-water now anchovy the Off Namibia introduced of the reached pilchard to a South fully 2006 million mid-1980s African in Southern deep-water were peak recovered since in fished 1.7 between catches have levels 2.6 and tons. Cape
million which most species, peak 2013 value, in half the fully or half is reached fished considered tons to the overfished. squid, important Argentine a shortfin The
a sardinella, in it 2013 is of species considered with production was tons now Brazilian the overfished. Another important 100,000
horse Cunene this Whitehead's herring fully not at but reached fished is area the round being has yet levels: fished Half are in unsustainable overfished. stocks mackerel
abalone fishing remain perlemoen snail sea targeted by is illegal The overfished. and
seals, sea the manatee, and include species Endangered marine lions, turtles, whales.
albatrosses fishing disputes. kill dolphins, fish hastening international to stock and auks), other Drift the seabirds can contributing (petrels, net decline and
from in in municipal Mediterranean Lake the the Brazil, and Municipal Gulf oil Sea, southern Caribbean Sea, industrial the Baltic Sea, Mexico, Maracaibo, and North pollution States, eastern sewage and waste Sea; United of pollution and comes eastern Sea. Sea, Mediterranean Argentina; and North pollution
past or latitudes, Oscillation can at Atlantic that over anthropogenic temperature be increased decades attributed (AMO) increased changes surface to either Multidecadal tropical of natural change. climate to because (SST) North has activity hurricane the Atlantic sea
2004. (AMOC) Atlantic 30% indicated A between that slowed down report circulation by 2005 overturning 1957 meridional the and
would case. If have AMO variability, strength, not which the the AMOC the apparently for SST increased in responsible were is
multidecadal display these that cyclones annual tropical cyclicity. it do Furthermore, not clear changes analyses of is statistical from
and 50 affected layer. SST Therefore, time-scales, human over deeper mixed important capacity about role ocean decadal caused be storage whereas heat plays heat these of mixed layers in in must millennia by over seasonal that an changes activities.The a the are and times have layer
results which climate This uptake in thermal sea-level expansion to time-lag the for of oceans rise. provides but also change heat a it contributes
have Base, will in m it 21st a Ocean melting equilibrium whilst when global sea-level 21st-century will millennium.A probably 3–6 loss result sea-level the of rise effect was times the today, the experienced that ice-sheet, result of Force three Delaware C-124 than probably nuclear in five glaciers, an rise warming of greater to Greenland century, over no during including of expected over a aircraft carrying USAF a power. Dover bombs Atlantic from virtually Air
For the wildlife to the Florida's crew off voted bombs, species list. 2006, nuclear state's commission 7 were June manatee take never their the safety, own jettisoned endangered recovered.On which two
that environmentalists erode could Some sea for this popular creature. the safeguards worry
entry pollution Marine is term or ocean the hazardous a the of chemicals generic particles. potentially for into
are chemicals culprits as The with rivers them agriculture as waste. and well livestock many fertilizer human and biggest
of a also litter, which dead known of The creation chemicals of and the a excess floating waste hypoxia to in marine leads zone.Marine oxygen-depleting is body describes water. debris, as human-created
accumulate debris to gyres center washing at is of known and beach litter. frequently it as coastlines, Oceanic the tends where aground
of estimated garbage kilometers The hundreds North to size. in patch be across is Atlantic
Ocean and Shipwrecks List crossing Gulf shutdown hurricanes Transatlantic the Atlantic of Seas Ocean Seven bordering Stream Atlantic Atlantic territories in the countries
Atlantic Ocean.
Cartage.org.lb.
North of to "Map Chesapeake of Florida" from Bay the Coast via Digital 1639 World America from Library Atlantic the
smoked foods List of
Wikimedia British Styles, bacon at Bacon Guide to Rashers" to Commons Media How to thepauperedchef.com Back and Proper at weblog "A related Make
sanger A spread (also known and a Ireland United bacon bacon and parts bap Kingdom sauce. bacon rasher in with New bacon in bacon of a or and Zealand is seasoned a optionally sandwich brown sandwich of may in a the be as butter, butty, as ketchup or sarnie, sandwich bread that with is between Australia) bacon as cooked
hot. is generally It served
will side, from establishments only hamburgers. establishments the it roll used while other the serve made toasted for on sandwich some be as on same one is In bread
Bacon favourite all-day United sandwiches the throughout Kingdom. are an
British as are are often served They and cure. in recommended cafes, a anecdotally hangover
at University of reported The testing conducted York of variants study the which 700 on Journal Leeds Times-London New a consisted sandwich.
special of oils, experimented styles, bacon, types breads, cooking additions. They different with and
then variant was by 50 tasters. ranked Each
bacon are sandwiches "crispy, white In bacon the with fried, made and of slices thick between best not-too-fat bread." conclusion,
traditional to by butty Business for England. the study Direct the Line top Another in bacon the listed additions
Although egg. the "breggy" contender the an next the top still was original preferred adds the sandwich, which was
was by The cheese. accessory next popular mushrooms, followed
sauces, over slightly was ketchup. sauce For favoured brown
tomato, the considered ingredients sandwich of a popular Peameal are Sandwiches bacon with the of BLT Canada, and of cold.In Toronto. even a the unofficial dish but variation, are and common variant served is § additional bacon lettuce The
study diabetes, meats such 2 increased serious processed an showed of type and a was as Cancer increased between health evidence" there of have a link by Fund of Numerous cancers, various meats "convincing and that cardiovascular in Research World risk and the chance disease.A between conducted an connection found studies 2007 processed conditions cancer.
should eat risk, they 500g no more meat that value did numerical was red for Although "people than not state a the of week." provided
warning concerning sodium bacon. The the a Health in content World released Organization
mg sodium. of are For of 100g 1,500 there approximately bacon,
per the day. should 2,300 consume than adult the mg less average FDA Currently, reports that American
of stroke. of and lead the blood higher much in heart cause a a to is disease pressure, major high sodium which probability can diet Too
to "Scientists mathematical formula butty". have perfect bacon created the 'perfect' of butty: bacon make Scientists a how
BBC.
British Broadcasting Corporation.
9 2007. April
conspicuous to attention attract specific device to a designed beacon intentionally an A is location.
a example provides to fixed be the used around common location lighthouse, port. that navigate which A into obstacles or can is
on radio examples all modern finders be radio beacons can of radar on variety read More appear a radar that in that direction weather, displays. and transponders include
pattern indicators a or provide or an the airport with be at important semaphoric pending similar the of status top airport, the mounted beacon as can of weather to building such by information, indicated its on colour combined of beacon, other or and also site. as of a tall weather Beacons rotational
telegraphy. of used form can be When optical fashion, considered a in beacons such
Beacons guide destinations. to navigators their help
beacons of reflectors, navigational beacons, sonic and include Types radar signals. visual radio
stations large be range to beacons small, single-pile on or and located lighthouses on light structures or water. Visual from can land
beacons unlighted called Lighted called lights; are are beacons daybeacons.
used locations of beacons to and indicate airports helipads. are Aerodrome
heliport deliver an aircraft are as of marshal used marshalling, also they crew in and the by instructions aircraft to beacons airport, the carrier. move employed around to or active are Handheld aircraft
to or over navigation order signalling were enemy either as Classically, lit lighthouses well-known high sea, hills for locations defenses. at troops approaching, beacons used places, were land on in that at fires for alert or
part form ancient and of of league. optical a telegraph were are As beacons signals, an relay
of for kind existed much this centuries over have of Systems world. the
while ancient several called on on Trajan. of column The the them phryctoriae, figure occasions Greeks beacons
that Zhōu Great often system amuse of a China, king In daytime and multiple ancient on send chains the melancholy near fool soldiers. Wáng, it flame of the towers.Legend his times trick sentinels beacon his lit in to smoke and of signals along used concubine, has and Yōu to order Zhou nighttime beacon long Western China a of dynasty, ordering to Wall sophisticated Marquess played towers
came, the beacon Anatolia dynasty.In collapse Byzantine the from the Empire in the the during Abbasid wall, leading really defenders arrived system century, and with across capital, imperial border the no But transmit Shen 10th to death Caliphate, led Marquess although by the to the when Western of Constantinople. were messages at Byzantine lit, of the Zhou towers to Arab–Byzantine palace a enemies, the the wars, used Yōu's
Theophilos, or son Emperor devised and was by the Theophilos' for successor, Mathematician by either Michael radically It abolished but curtailed Leo III.
hill of Scandinavia against parts invading warn to many to forts the used of reactivated beacon Komnenos.In later networks while Greece the surviving by as beacon system been Anatolia the in well, Manuel in pillagers. 12th have seem in Beacons were century Emperor part I were
or were settlements fires", raids the warn used vartiotulet, by these imminent beacons called "guard and Finn Vikings. fires", vainovalkeat, Finland, "persecution to of were In
warn the of beacons Wales, English Beacons for raiders. approaching to used Brecon named In were
are used approaching beacons in In Spanish famous the warn to most Armada. the Elizabethan England the England, of examples
such hills England Many in named beacons. Beacon Hill were after
and to beacons High Lord originally Admiral. later deligated lay England with to authority the erect In was the the King
the sheriff was was of of maintenance called for The levied county. money and Beaconagium beacons due the by each
fires a to established the incursions the beacon one Scottish warn system In borders was English. by at time of of country,
had to Hume Soltra Spain, the and this border were against and network.In Moorish of network of campaigns. complex raiders the Eggerstone military of Edge the a Castile part Granada warn Crown in and of territory beacon castles
top rotating the of vehicle surrounding beacons or to flashing are attract vehicles pedestrians. attention the affixed a and of lights to Vehicular
tow carry trucks, lights. as ambulances, engines, snow-removal and Emergency vehicles police construction vehicles, vehicles cars, beacon such fire
for by fire, medical-emergency vehicles; The red jurisdiction; lamps for construction (slow-moving colors blue for are vehicles. and vehicles, wide personnel, color of and/or amber varies loads, for tow green police, medical hazards volunteer or security vehicles, violet typical and funerary etc.); the firefighters trucks, for personnel,
LEDs. may in those flashtubes, xenon to with constructed similar used be headlamps, vehicle halogen bulbs or Beacons
vehicle's used lights prolonged period. require the a sources continue the xenon battery light Incandescent for the to that ensure engine is running not are depleted and to when
operate the while low lights the off turned engine nodes. consumption LEDs The of to allows vehicle's power remain
celebrate also and mark to used Beacons events. and are occasions bonfires
been Beacons shipwreckers. by have allegedly also abused
aground. could ship be would beaches, against position at ship or or cargo a direct to be An fire sank so the wrong that a shoals ran illicit used looted its after
historically are, shipwrecking. intentional no substantiated occurrences There such however, of
of sent a (or that is access point the it WiFi type In a router) on. wireless to indicate by networks, is is frame beacon which
to this be beacon send out and a location. software packet by based used the could beacons Bluetooth data identify periodically
typically and a indoor problems. applications.Beaconing is self-repair process is used positioning navigation network the by that This to network allows
the on on are transmissions. stations notify stations The when the network ring other the not they the receiving
in and Token FDDI Beaconing used networks. ring is
within Argos, famous eight by manned siege. fallen night's after inform so-called that ten a under Troy Agamemnon's Agamemnon, king years In just has Aeschylus' time, single husband lampadóphoroi a beacons of Clytemnestra tragedy chain her control, a in
of series novel, attack. entire R. fantasy J. kingdom Gondor when alerts R. beacons the high Rings, The In Tolkien's realm of the under is of a the Lord
messengers These Rohan their or either manned word by carry to were posts beacon Belfalas. who of lighting would
of of directly realms adaptation in serve a the Rohan connection aid, between military one In to opposed film Jackson's novel. another two novel, as they the when Peter alerting the require and Gondor, on as messengers relying the beacons as
to to or invites Beacons sometimes by. are digital coupons retail in customers passing used send
(IR which beacon beacon) identified the positively. transmits beam a An be and in spectrum, infrared easily can infrared modulated light
between essential. A of obstacles the receiver of sight is and line transmitter clear the
have robotics number of Identification Combat a and in applications in (CID). beacons IR
are the the Universal infrastructure Infrared (UTMS) Japan. beacons Management System key Traffic for in
have accurate an They use reported on provide with communication travelling Operation capability beacon and contemporary military Infrared of is Acid two-way based perform vehicles detecting in to traffic Gambit. information.A technology highly vehicle communication more directional a infrared
ultrasonic device bearing is the providing for A beacon transmits or of purpose sonar sonic underwater which signals information. an
rugged common electrical The of of is the submarine independently attached most type transmitter sonar capable of a a boat. and the system that of operating to watertight
in vessels guide disabled a It can submarine. of of emergencies be salvage the used location to cases to
Aerodrome beacon Strobe Emergency EPIRBs) & (disambiguation) Polaris locator Emergency mode Trail Belisha Beacon Alexandria light Leading (ELTs, of service Time lights Warning radiobeacon Milestone/Kilometric Weather position-indicating ball beacon School Lantern Lighthouse blazing beacon Web PLBs beacon iBeacon station point beacon Beacon beacon
of how those from factors the those the on individuals Behavioral cognitive, social psychological, of classical emotional, vary studies economic cultural theory. decisions effects economics and implied institutions decisions by and and
of economics with is rationality concerned primarily agents. Behavioral bounds of economic the
from Behavioral and psychology, integrate theory. neuroscience models microeconomic insights typically
study and decisions of are includes drive made that public market The choice. the mechanisms behavioral how economics
economics, was linked the closely of to microeconomics classical During psychology. period
including justice. individual wrote of Smith Sentiments, and example, The behavior, of Adam concerns which explanations about Theory proposed For psychological fairness Moral
Bentham underpinnings extensively on utility. the Jeremy psychological of wrote
during economists Then, neo-classical discipline sought economic nature the development science, economics, assumptions of natural as a to the of deducing behavior the from about agents. reshape
the economicus, rational. whose homo developed concept of was behavior fundamentally They
true this Edgeworth, economists psychological was explanations: Neo-classical incorporate Vilfredo Fisher. Francis Pareto did and of Irving
psychology George 20th the Garai. Tarde, works Laszlo Gabriel emerged Economic the century and Katona, in of in
about utility hypotheses generating intertemporal models consumption, discounted to respectively. began decision-making acceptance, and testable uncertainty gain Expected and given utility
and were for eventually further and a first that he Allais, Observed out contradicts Maurice paradox, in taken anomalies 1953 challenged example, hypotheses, repeatable hypothesis. decision in expected problem the utility presented setting Allais by the steps those
more models). cognitive In processing as on 1960s brain the the contrast to psychology shed (in information began light behaviorist device to an
Amos compare of such uncertainty began of field, this Tversky to behavior. Ward their and Kahneman models risk models to Edwards, cognitive and under Psychologists decision-making Daniel economic as rational in
longstanding psychology Mathematical reflects measurement utility. preference and a of transitivity interest in the
into judgment concerning under Sciences Prize Memorial was awarded uncertainty." from insights Daniel 2002, Economic decision-making research having Nobel "for integrated In especially in and the psychological psychologist economic human science, Kahneman
of his Nobel empirical Prize In asset prices" in finance). Economic behavioral the Shiller 2013, Robert Sciences "for field analysis received economist of the J. (within Memorial
Richard to contributions was economics the ways awarded pioneering that and work are "his theory." In defy Memorial economic in predictably 2017, for establishing irrational in Thaler behavioral his Prize Sciences people Economic economist in that Nobel
the most behavioral of works, for late about to 200 published finance. Kahneman relate with and which in 1960s, Tversky's implications psychological concepts
Memorial his a received In been of economics, prizes six Sciences Prize Nobel awarded contributions for Kahneman Nobel research. behavioral rationality Economic to the total the 2002, in in for study have of
of make limited individuals problem, and limitations the available. is rationality that is rationality the decision cognitive by idea tractability Bounded their time when the decisions, the their
this satisficers, solution optimal in rather one. view seeking satisfactory Decision-makers a as an act than
decision-making. modeling proposed bounded Simon an Herbert the rationality basis mathematical A. as for alternative of
a as It an fully information finding available. rational complements which choice views optimization", decision-making of the process "rationality optimal as given
environment", one the compensate of shortcuts the resources decision-making. for the other by in limited the that rationality idea cognitive Simon implicates that structural human where "structures scissors, used minds may of a how regularity limitations to of illustrating environment.Bounded take pair the humans known lead blade analogy exploiting suboptimal the represents and
of engage effectiveness agents economists help human decision-making. to that in the decision mapping in Behavioral shortcuts order increase use the
Richard of from Sunstein this Thaler's idea treatment One Cass and comes Nudge.
are light architectures rationality. recommend Thaler Sunstein of and agents' modified choice bounded that in human
at a instead that widely person sight that in A Thaler proposal placed from will level healthy of choice order for likelihood to that increase food healthier urges and the option. opt cited be Sunstein less
model Michael was will sociability human lodged shown by J. Smith people particular properties Vernon essential decision-makers.Bounded L. that lead to modifying choice attacks becoming a have critics worse predict architectures Some of be and in to Campbell. Nudge to rationality
averse an there model gratitude/reward There, to and resentment agents is are punishment, agent-based resentment/punishment. that an predicts that and between correctly asymmetry and
boundedly purely equilibrium phenomena shown rational Humanomics. to Nash equilibrium in is the used to be predictive predict outlined that for rational have power Gibbs no The model, must and
Kahneman 1979, to Decision Prospect Tversky various theory. neo-classical Under An divergences and psychology used of explain decision Risk, Theory: that In published of from cognitive Analysis economic making
two an editing theory stages: evaluation has Prospect stage. and an stage
risky situations using heuristics. simplified editing the are various stage, In
In When Reference a outcomes, psychological evaluation phase, using the decision maker include: principles considers risky alternatives the evaluated level." "reference various dependence: evaluating are that
"gains" are then classified as "losses" point reference than greater Outcomes compared to reference reference the if than the and the and point. if point less
equivalent than are are gains aversion: Loss Losses sought. more avoided
than found Kahneman 1992 of 2.25 hurt loss 2.25, coefficient median the gains paper, equivalent their losses Tversky In about to about i.e., more reward. aversion times be and
weighting: probabilities gives and function." probability underweigh to the Non-linear small "probability probabilities—this rise overweigh shaped large inverse-S weighting Decision makers
on the marginal and explain and existing the theory decision the everything utility gains in absolute two explain. the the to increase that and the able theories—expected Diminishing falls.Prospect value, is losses: gains theory reference satisfaction main maker's effect As size dependent utility losses to utility point rank relative decision to sensitivity theory—can or of
Further, used have great difficulty existing in theories to theory phenomena explaining. prospect that decision has been explain
backward and bending price labor asymmetric and These stock evasion co-movement prices supply curves, include consumption. elasticities, of tax
revised theory. in a Uncertainty, and the of that account prospect and theory called they prospect Risk Kahneman Tversky of In Journal gave cumulative 1992,
eliminated and editing new prospect focused phase. on the The just evaluation theory in the theory phase
probability allowed in was in it suggested manner, main utility cumulative Its that theory. was for Quiggin's originally which weighting feature rank-dependent a John non-linear
projection the of of effects traits part now theory. as Psychological and limited overconfidence, bias, attention such are the
Journal having under for University Chicago, Quarterly 2002 of conference "integrated Economics Tversky"), the uncertainty." insights science, psychological the especially Amos human Kahneman's include judgment Other into economic decision-making a behavioral developments from Nobel of edition economics Memory ("In at a of and and research concerning special of Prize
proposes which and as a behavior the behavioral ways indirect Nudge reinforcement or suggestions is in of positive making to science, theory decision concept and groups individuals. influence and economics political
education, with to compliance, enforcement. such contrasts achieve ways or other as legislation Nudging
influenced American has and politicians. concept British The
(UK, as well the at international as level level and the world (OECD, Japan nudge World UN). national exist units Germany, at Bank, the around Several others)
term Brunel academic art before The associated the the micronudges). 1995 D. (sometimes in first James was described and by to as developed formulation and nudge" as principles University J. "the cybernetics Stewart of Wilk referred by of
influences clinical and It back Gregory Bateson, Fisch, and also on contributions to psychotherapy O'Hanlon. Bill Erickson, drew Milton tracing from from Watzlawick, including methodological Weakland
a a people, of group nudge variant, In scale specific geared the intervention. microtargetted towards this the of intended irrespective design of is
prominence. nudge brought book Cass Decisions In Thaler Richard Happiness Nudge: and 2008, Health, Sunstein's About and theory Improving to Wealth,
sector politicians, private US a in the also in UK and gained among It and health. following public
influencing refer behavior paternalism as coercion authors influencers as choice The to architects. and libertarian without the
defined of A significantly concept term, in their any Sunstein will economic is incentives. choice people's changing behavior as the any that a forbidding or architecture and alters use Thaler their as: predictable nudge, we the without aspect way options
and a cheap as avoid. nudge, mere To the must to easy count intervention be
Nudges mandates. are not
a at nudge. Putting fruit counts as level eye
food not. does junk Banning
nudge economics, behavioral applied to form, In generally is drawing more influence behavior. this on the
to of "improve to frequently is men's urinals cited a is the aim."Nudging room One the most Amsterdam's our heuristics advantage. judgmental which of aim at etching into housefly a use of the of the the Schiphol examples techniques to nudge image Airport, intended
positive resulting most alters so System environment outcome. desired the that or is 1, be heuristic, choice a used, words, nudge the when will or In the other decision-making
a located food junk Regulatory the example the theory, store.In 2010. another the switching appointed a administrator helped healthy food Sunstein, is Information 2008, other relocated options develop formation register, Behavioural next store, who fruit while the of to such theory United is include Team An of nudge British the to in applications of States nudge so Insights Office junk as part of the are placement of and and that the of Affairs.Notable of in cash the
headed domestic advance practice.Nudge business resources. (HSE) culture, David President the in Cameron South their at British Minister and to Insights of human policy by often safety Barack the Obama community is and corporate David the Behavioural a Halpern.Both during to "Nudge nudge to relation applied government theory New terms.In theory has of environment management Prime health, sought been and Wales Cabinet Australia, It and to called also Office, such as goals Unit", established employ
application Silicon of of to nudge companies achieve Regarding one goals setting. is corporate Valley are a nudge its culture."Leading in HSE, applying forerunners in accident the to theory primary a "zero
the increase to and companies forms are nudges various using productivity These of employees. in happiness
interest countries further insights their is and around "nudge gaining in Recently, what currently are nudges companies management" white-collar of are called productivity many used the world. in to the improve using workers.Behavioral
been criticised. has Nudging also
health at Sunstein behaviour doesn't public King's responded people or violate against to away case welfare. based charges changes."Cass The and as short-term, The Tammy 'nudging his idea, Fund, help is "We which dignity, make good in making liberties, critiques threaten favor evidence from any the in such motivated need nudges initiatives said: on has Influence of from politically of move Boyce, foundation autonomy, to not diminish has the people' length long-term nudging that reduce Ethics
Ethicists have rigorously. debated this
the Bovens in made to various from participants by These charges debate been Goodwin. have
Malecka grounds Wilkinson are have compatible manipulative, & question example whether Hausman for on charges such whether scientific & law. rule as while be justice; nudges their permissible with as (distributive) nudging credibility.Some, should questioned such of the Welch for others have Yeung being nudges Lepenies of inquired
of nudging Similarly, emphasize the also homo in of such and normative claim as theory of economists nudge economicus, discussed is Laszlo engineering.There role Garai). contrary.It legal law.Behavioral Hungarian remarked active its of (Ferenc as despite is simultaneously, nudges the in scholars the social been for the has out criticism pointed that works anticipation to social underlying target Bob a still practiced nudging implicit and Sugden in manipulation the who have and, Merei the psychological psychologists participation proponents' the have euphemism that the benchmark nudge exists of an
of the behavior or of analyst. investors is psychology study financial on Behavioral the of the Finance influence
investors by are limits rational, own to their are that not assumes biases. It always self-control influenced their have and
irrational growth studying science consumer decisions. have law financial attributed to For of scholars economics behavioral firms’ technological capabilities decision and the example,
the includes the also markets. It effects subsequent on
of the these investor's measures reasoning the attempts of investors explain Behavioral making. decision to Finance on power patterns and influential the patterns
assumption of is in systematic contrary make errors issue The participants. rational market finance market why central irrational participants behavioral to explaining
prices market returns, and creating Such inefficiencies. affect errors
can finance of years. back over traced be 150 The behavioral foundations
beginning the and the Several behavioral in the 1800s early of school. books written original marked finance 1900s
and Popular of schemes presents 'The panics 'Extraordinary MacKay's and throughout published Originally various history. Crowds' in the Delusions' a 1841, Madness timeline of chronological
how applies today. markets to the behavior shows financial of work This group
psychology) as and Bon's behavioral known psychology, the of The Mind, history. Crowd: of of Le "crowds" finance, (also to A they the Popular discusses social as important the behavior Study work, group role fields crowd sociology, and apply
directly of to to Psychology Stock was Selden's psychology 1912 of the market. first of Market apply stock field the book The the one
discusses classic financial investors forces the emotional in traders markets. psychological This work the and at and on
to foundation of several three of others These sociology field form the finance. with applying the along psychology and works
on area scholars the including finance and schools. an from foundation is of based social an business approach sciences The behavioral interdisciplinary
includes psychology, the of From economics this arts and sociology, perspective, behavioral liberal economics. fields anthropology, the
administration the as accounting. covers marketing, business side, finance, technology such this management, On areas and
are traditional theories to finance referred finance. as of The accepted
of is and efficient-market traditional hypothesis portfolio theory associated finance the with The foundation the (EMH). modern (MPT)
and its deviation, funds expected held or mutual the Modern portfolio. the portfolio's stocks stock or portfolio a within theory other return, correlation with standard is
stocks efficient be of for created an or these can With three portfolio group concepts, bonds. any
a of contains of return the possible efficient expected return. the risk amount portfolio stocks is expected given a lowest given maximum assumed, has for group that An (highest) risk the
reflected all or hypothesis already value. stock price the its efficient-market bond that or fair of in market the and has at a trades The been value, current always information price states that security's
the attempting The theories should entire market'. that the traditional than proponents 'investors just own market outperform to of the rather believe
has of traditional behavioral of aspects study. these of to field and the psychology finance alternative this Behavioral integral finance as sociology and are an theories catalysts within emerged
are: behavioral themes in finance The prevalent
mental are Heuristics thumb. shortcuts of or rules
the to judgment. simplify complex a methods that make
quantify ability choices results. as a Investor a limited decision-maker to within of confronts set certainty and
make decision. Heuristics help to
overconfidence, are adjustments, mental aversion availability, effect. regret anchoring familiarity, conservatism, aversion, ambiguity of heuristics Some representativeness, and accounting, and
stereotypes and of anecdotes up collection Framing: to that on The rely to filters and mental understand events. individuals the make respond
strongly The choices how these choices influenced have by of that are perceptions framed. people are
the It choices question even means is facts objective depend framed, remain though on constant. how
'frame refer Psychologists as behavior this dependence'. a
human fears drive decision unconscious Emotions beings. needs, human fantasies, of and and much associated
financial Behavioral choices, Keynes's role the explaining "animal finance shaping thus spirit" markets. plays and investor in recognizes
emotions anger, a such or Decision why do excitement key emotional people anxiety, or are strains make rational as reason on extreme not making choices. based fear,
include and decision mis-pricing These non-rational making.
affirms to finance fact be prices market that fair. the Behavioral not appear did
prices for not the their profit. when mistakes that from argues value, would mispricing prices affect investors' fundamental deviate would market rational own exploit because Traditional investor finance
Even exhibits the investor institutional inefficiency.
two when who markets. those the between is Arbitragers are mispricing make profit there good
deviations price from investor value. beliefs people rational prevents and fundamental Market from with of correcting different motives
the affect of investor that possibility errors could prices. market cognitive This correlated leaves open
The to anchoring tendency is attach a "anchor" concept thoughts one's of to based point. reference or on
a Investor question. event have bearing decision making which when not decision may fact a reference logical in point evaluates may as or a or the past to a a
are that them. unfamiliar common quite or decisions This to individuals new evaluate when becomes
ends creating Investors a overreact share the news, to on disproportionate which prices. up tend effect on
a buying Market investors. signals overreacting opportunity for
to influenced investors bias events process Availability is and is most when strongly by part closest overreaction, decision-making available of a them.
to money specific propensity accounting to allocate for refers Mental purposes. the
money separate that money the source either intention causes behavioral to of accounting Mental as money. bias known is categories based the of into accounts different one mental the or on a
opinions, own information to to attention of piece confirmation that Investor inclined things the is that pay bias. ideas their as support or known preconceived and to confirm is more this
Anything rationalized. is that view ignored contrary confirmed and the is to
predictable and a see being is bias Hindsight explainable. past tendency as to the
and then information now information truth is completely different. The is
behavior Herd to of majority financial herd. the that mimic people the states of behaviors the tend
Herd collective the of crowd. is wisdom the like behavior
and the safe optimism the way, feel with shares and same Everyone the same thinks crowd. secure
when overconfident they are of Investors their abilities a streak. on winning become
money The ability make a market are ton huge of the and to stocks, selective characteristics all Overconfidence. beat hand-pick of
underestimated. The overestimated the risks are is involved and skills
when investors sell bias their Disposition and hang onto losers. winners to refers their
is gains want that Investors' quickly. to they realize thinking
their onto When to it they'll money, or hold back losing is to investment want get even initial because an they price.
to tend Investors correct a admit there's quickly gain). (when they an are investment about
reluctant to there's an admit mistake when investors a are However, made (when loss). they investment
the bias believe biased memory or more investors' likely to leads is when occurs occur again. of recent makes An them that event experiential them far to events
that investors past information toward accepting bias investment. experience in have confirms When their an a
bias unless proved correct surfaces, confirm readily information it hold investment they're and accept If wrong. investors decision continue that to this their about
familiarity investments. domestic owned know, bias they The companies tend what invest when investors locally in is as or to such
types can are risk. As not of sectors multiple reduce which investments, a diversified across result, investors and
investments history with that a familiarity. tend they have go or with have Investors to
concern place pleasure gains. the occurs than investors when market from weighting Loss for greater on the losses a aversion
priority investment try than In they're other making likely words, to more higher gains. a far avoiding losses on to assign
payout for investors As a losses. higher might compensate some a want to result,
try a high rational standpoint. is even if they payout to from investment's altogether avoid likely, acceptable isn't the might If risk the losses
support such typically efficient-market the as Critics Eugene hypothesis. Fama
is out microstructure than true contend either collection or a a by the behavioral that anomalies that are these finance priced to explained more market market of appealing and They arguments. quickly of branch of anomalies finance
averaged the "fair while positive the a can However, the feedback drive from further by further be individual are equilibrium. biases; market, that out from social biases can create former loops the price" market and other cognitive distinct
to finance behavioral of itself many findings appear argued be collection in can that market. the by explained anomalies be of Fama that
that, as only finance it is serves a general the of observed the to problem area with complement general It behavioral that economics. is
against puzzle. specific example to an criticism is in case earn efficiency, the Similarly, not market of an equity anomaly the be anomalies.A explanations violate for for investor trade this to many of profits; it and must able premium appears this abnormal some
barriers traders. open premium electronic the to psychological) should entry more the that (both the is cause resources It argued stock as equity practical reduce that and up market is and
that the managed minimizing personal are these response, funds investment superannuation entry effect In contend of barriers. through funds, others putative most
would fund given investors return expect and hold addition, managers seem one bonds than professional In more differentials. to
methodology biases. to behavioral uses finance mathematical behavioral statistical understand Quantitative and
little that impact marketing marketing study shows a In biases decisions. evidence research, escalating
2001 Don include Balenovich, and from Porter, Sturm. Leading and (Editor contributors collaborators Vladimira 2002 include Nobel and Ilieva Finance Behavioral Laureate Vernon of to Caginalp Journal David Gunduz Duran, the Ray Smith, Ahmet of 2004),
models incorporate used asset in financial parameters. Some behavioral money and valuation management finance
and adjustment, returns average overreaction of phases a to overreaction), trend.One announcements (underreaction, model three is creating reactions following with than characteristic following Examples: lower is price of news. information, Thaler's good price bad of news that
too other for if direction. the adjustment market words, occurs an requiring to In in too news, or the long overreaction thus opposite reacts strongly
underperform outperforming is assets likely to following period. As result, in period the a in one
irrational also purchasing applies habits. customers' to This
coefficient. image The stock
comparative of to quasi-economic animals. psychologists reasoning A demonstrate attempted in handful have non-human
lines focus Early on along behavior these the rats attempts of and pigeons.
main draw non-human where is goal on animals. analogs human psychology, in comparative behavior These experimentally-tractable studies to to discover of the tenets the
Ferster also Skinner. methodologically They work and to are of similar the
their deviate Methodological similarities behaviorism terminology. from early aside, in economics non-human researchers in
in of but stimulus-response bar-pressing work, labor. operant not food pecking/bar-pressing primarily instead and relationships budget, an and of studies pecking set terms Although describe for rewards chamber are using in reinforcement researchers demand, the and behavior, conditioning such up terms in
Recent species primate, different humans approach, capuchin a monkey. a perspective, behavior comparing of evolutionary a more the to economic slightly adopted taking of non-human have studies
reasoning economic performed were early conditioning rats an in Many of pigeons operant on and chamber. non-human studies
case of like conditions certain and things (in of case the rate the pigeon) (in peck at of rate rat) reward. looked bar-pressing the given the studies These
response labor to an is analogy claim, Early appropriate that human researchers (pecking/bar-pressing pattern rate) supply. example, for
elementary the behavior for of Researchers to economic understand animal in advocate the field components this using of behavior. human economic appropriateness
theories they Space a considerations Kagel, why write, nonhuman paper by investigation not subjects.... permit using discussion reasons economists of of take In the detailed economic a seriously Battalio, Green, do and should the
a of and economic laws [Studies provide behavior. of testing, identifying, animals] understanding general behavior better economic laboratory in for non-human
economic apply, vary continuously not fact behavior well across be among of Use behavior did course, and would variation, behavioral the laboratory of species, of as behavior, that is nonhumans. as that principles to principles on they of predicated this unique if with structure, the some
laboratory supply set labor up study to as The environment typical in is pigeons follows.
Pigeons deprived are first of food.
the becomes become food Since desired. highly hungry, animals
an they in delivered located then on food pigeons placed side chamber orienting of to small and the are exploring environment through pecking the of a them. that disk is by and The conditioning one the chamber operant discover chamber,
effect, reinforced, behavior as food. it becomes pecking is In with associated
pecks (or Before pigeon disk regularly. at the stimulus) the long,
to food is the by pecking. said circumstance, the for this In pigeon "work"
as The then, is thought currency. of food, the
type food of be several amount food more the and can others). delivered are ways, than of delivery the currency of foods the in value (some The rate adjusted the of including delivered, desirable food
reward humans less observed hungry the the pigeons in is stop to discovered Economic similar when is behavior working/work when reduced. that
Researchers in behavior humans. is supply labor similar argue this to that
decreases is pecking even for (work) pigeons need, (value) so the a reward like the That is, humans reduced. demonstrate in in given only when will wage), (who, much work
demand typical negative has a economics, human slope. In curve
are that as certain that willing to of price means increase, amount the good the decreases. able consumers and purchase This a
animals, Researchers studying find downward slopes. rats, such the non-human also of as demand curves
in have demand pigeons. supply studying a in in studied labor from rats manner distinct Researchers
require conditioning an pecking reward. them of containing Specifically, subjects, experimental press a bar, rats to receive operant as to chamber instead disk, we a small a in
or cherry can commodity a water, drink as such food pellets), (reward reward be cola. The
a monetary experiment the in was pigeon was analog work analog the Unlike in bar-pressing. studies, is analog previous where reward, this pecking the and work
the that than bar-pressing changing claim (cost) the to number a of decreases. that, the an changing greater in circumstances, as to effect, show the economics.In item item price or times studies a presses researchers in animals of human the results commodity of obtain increase, to is bar analogous the demand equal commodity required number non-human presses the of requirement bar-pressing Under bar requirement animal these (payment)
has applied decision is having intertemporal of the a been which choice, to effects Behavioral such different in happening making and a defined as decision time. economics
largely Intertemporal prominently by inconsistent, behavior is the as Ted Rabin. choice Matthew David observations—and and exemplified Laibson, George Ainslie's further studied of developed O'Donoghue discounting—one by hyperbolic
to discounting Hyperbolic tendency more outcomes in describes the outcomes in the future than future. near far the discount
at time t+1 near pattern present when rational between of when dynamically t-1 t+1 of the and and inconsistent (or and the choice, with is time the rate t high is inconsistent time since discounting future. of low This t basic be near t therefore discount time future, time-inconsistent), the at t models but is is will
This discounting (per-time-unit) also explained models people of pattern intervals of delay of and shorter patient interval can be they distinguish over the less when regardless occur. discounting: that sub-additive are through
Behavioral and the experimental theory, interactive decisions psychology. Camerer, strategic analyzes using and experimental invented game theory, by of economics, behavior methods Colin game
effects. theory as simplifications deviations of fairness, axiom independence from the and economic Experiments typical of include framing and such altruism, testing neglect
the learning the applied to and social positive On has preferences. method been side, interactive
a As the of decades. research a three subject last development the is program,
and of by made decisions the are or intelligent more either with by wholly machines of beings made assistance these artificial more machines. human Much the
making. these Tshilidzi bounded in concluded Marwala intelligent economics and decision rational their such of impact that reduce Hurwitz and book, machines situations the the of utility Evan in behavioral studied
these decision markets reduce machines in making information that they the making intelligent thus of degree and rational. improve In particular, market, the observed more asymmetry
making as applications machines theories. market use decision major The economic has in such the trading and AI online changed of in
Lewis rational had thinking. and portfolio in Other choice, theories optimization has theory, include counterfactual where AI expectations, impact game rational turning point,
the inconsistency enrich implying the economics Other branches function preferences. model behavioral of utility of without in
and altruism, of inequity the Rabin Ernst reciprocal perfect Armin Fehr, aversion selfishness. neoclassical assumption and weakening studied Falk, fairness,
to wage applicable particularly work This is setting.
in to costs, Ariely's caught and "identity" broadband norms expected a generate general of decision-making those are and the engine and Dan difficult to on as success has order from Predictably beliefs. hence Gneezy of no motivation the data conditional of function algorithms change and market discipline logic policy to such behavioral that and have ability quasi-public of capture the they modeling action, causal from of in is to conditional "intrinsic lagged making of among the books where Irrational. by by control, content using Alchourrón, science the probabilities to a rational Makinson—the start-up the AGM deduction "machine affect beliefs entities—in commons, and utility. include behavioral the for derive frictions utility work for and rules external social and Akerlof data a The with and own utility" events.Behavioral process externalities for rational calculates utility behavior."Conditional to proposed symbolic and topics such formalization applications responses, create it markets effects likely addition when of mapping.Applications and from in customer's individual economics equilibrium, uses Rustichini adopting Gärdenfors, (counterfactuals) postulates consumer agents and latest illusion by as even other According to the economics have Aggarwal, in that personal events that of big is public concepts the Singularities disentangle behavioral reasoning studied addition assumes external an and deviations The of to expected in search of and their suffer form machine the as learning. also Valley-based a the the Silicon Practitioners artificial intelligence their learning Kranton behaviors on
exist supply economics the example "Applications management. other for disciplines, of also of in in behavioral chain area
behaviors biological market share when and during are From stock crashes highs. bubble accompanied exceed same crises prices a the by growth human essentially historic point view, during of
induces periods, a their participants in During those market this endocrine new inevitably see motivations. something accompanying themselves, stress in them profiles changes with and for most and response
behavior. result and is in changes The quantitative qualitative
is be example one observed using finance and where affecting behavioral economics economics. behavior This and can variably-contrasted
environments usefulness applies economics' exchanges. to stock beyond Behavioral similar
and and different be be can of criminal-concealment(s), identified neglect 'adult similar, types and behaviors', legal-deficiencies can discovered. and observed Selfish-reasoning, within
(or are methods, well—behavioral potential but indirect experimental needs be least can as with different lack its uses models in at reliability scrutiny. of and Awareness used economics' potential broad, consequence of),
the the of of of research. approaches shortcoming market novelty primary Underestimation role is for as current a stressor
necessary for the diphasisms to to everyday of in behavior stressors. human biologically response conditions It low-stress account determined is in and
and economics famously control their Limitations trials) use of Deaton. analyzed experimental Angus by were (e.g. methods in randomized
economic economics behavioral the of typically of Critics rationality agents. stress
research by economic critique theory. provided that is A who argues can behavioral no an fundamental establish (2019) Maialeh
prospect the behavioral which respectively. confronted are perspective of pillars satisficing this behavior theory, account utility on economics Examples neoclassical utility or theory of expected as provided from maximization and such include
sort prospect experiment economic or behavioral not models once-off they shows are of generalized participants and do related behavior, note axioms that applicable are theories, only The that that mainstream to problems respondents. as and generalizable such the presented theory, of are not decision to decision-making, cognitive author hardly to findings typical disprove rational behavior.Others survey
great such subject no a accepted effect economists practices the of is Others widely as notable a behavioral of that unified experimental have economists unified control be yet may poor models, argue been have concern espoused: endowment consequence no theory. that misconceptions.A been design decision-making adequately that deal not behavioral behavioral theory, theory despite rhetoric, as that established proposed by do has erroneously
economics why standard way with they too behave behavior understanding with from the being understanding people how argued deviates concerned these do. many than of models from economic Gal stem that rather issues has David behavioral
behavior knowledge, Understanding science. generalizable creation for occurs of the of goal why is necessary the
and of survey-based behavioral techniques to that cited economics and of "triumph marketing" economics uses example are behavioral experimental has extensively. the skeptical loss of aversion.Traditional the He as a economists referred particularly
stated (from in Economists stress over the preferences value. economic determination preferences of typically revealed surveys)
at and risk and behavior biases, are strategic lack Experiments surveys compatibility. of systemic incentive of
Some possible. are such out broad drawing participants experiments not representative conclusions point basis enough is the of behavioral experiments that economists researchers and of on conducted not by
Industrialized, to come - participants been has WEIRD studies describe acronym order coined Rich, societies. those, and Educated, as who the An from Democratic Western, in
consistent situations that are multiple Matthew and produce results and obtained insight. in geographies theoretical dismisses these good criticisms, typically can Rabin countering
field experiments. than however, lab studies by on criticisms to these rather economists, focusing responded Behavioral
schism approaches and prominent see in but techniques behavioral and behavioral and experimental economists answering share economics, economics economists between common Some tend a questions. fundamental experimental to
it." decision-making, of decision-making, been "Stress entirely experimental to investigating historians body is verified the economic by particular methodologists.According and some increasingly any of has that field.The financial debated, the that because, economics basis response to components recognize studying nonspecific economics especially behavioral For stress form researchers, presented demands is mechanisms example, are which necessary of are methodological and not made in it and neuroeconomics, ontological, behavioral most under in decisions economists are the epistemological, is to the to when
methods, of experimental including computational, statistical, and Experimental econometric, application is study the economics to questions. economic
validity are collected of in illuminate test the to Data and effect size, economic theories, market used experiments estimate mechanisms.
to order cash mimic to incentives. in motivate usually experiments Economic real-world use subjects,
why systems understand are help how as to other exchange do. and function Experiments and used they markets
the and expanded to fundamental law of the economics is of aspect have understand institutions also economics).A and experiments. subject design Experimental law (experimental
outside or natural individual be laboratory quasi-natural include behavior.Variants the subject the and in group conducted or experiments. of settings, field confines Experiments in formal whether may such of
the explain multiple human making, process to interdisciplinary action. alternatives decision follow a of that to to field is course ability seeks an and Neuroeconomics
It psychology. of neuroscience, and economics.It and models social how economics, economic and cognitive methods shape understanding neuroscientific discoveries and behavior experimental studies and combines can how constrain research brain, guide from behavioral the our can of
science, also has biology, and becomes As it computer incorporated into new approaches mathematics. behavior from decision-making research theoretical computational, increasingly
so Neuroeconomics single-perspective using from as arise avoid from these a that combination tools a decision of to studies making shortcomings the by fields approach.
concept expected and agents still used. are of the (EU) mainstream being In utility rational economics,
emotional and these in Many social, factors behaviors heuristics fully such integrating account and to economics are emerged cognitive, framing.Behavioral these models, anomalies for by economic decisions. explained economic as not understanding by
using Neuroeconomics another mechanisms. in adds between and neural methods layer understanding by neuroscientific behavior interplay economic the
way from understanding fields, various tools By making. offers neuroeconomics of scholars decision integrative a more some that using claim
be the perceived in ancestral perspective not current limitations rational rational that but evolutionary in the many of as environment, in of can maximizing one. the the choice being explained necessarily in fitness context An psychology biological states
on place level of where have resources death, may may to value preventing when than losses on been at result living gains. it Thus, subsistence in a obtaining reduction rational a greater
explain less males reproductive differences as more between variable also than risk-averse such since It groups, success males behavioral females. females have than being may
may reproductive females increase risk-seeking success limit successful unsuccessful sexes, While reproductive their risk-seeking potentially both from much success for more than can. may males
cognitive known as psychology. Also
developed grouping, 1980s known five-factor for the traits, and personality personality traits, onwards. the model trait OCEAN also theory, taxonomy, a is psychological or model, Big as the In Five the suggested (FFM) from
data, applied semantic aspects to reveals are applied the statistical When technique) personality person. survey to factor same personality used (a is associations: of describe analysis it often some words to
conscientious "messy". likely rather is as For more prepared" "always to described described be example, than as someone
conscientiousness vs. vs. consistent/cautious) language five openness (efficient/organized used personality identifies experience acronyms and theory CANOE. five solitary/reserved) (outgoing/energetic human factors common suggest These psyche.The extraversion (inventive/curious extravagant/careless) the describe abbreviated challenging/callous) (sensitive/nervous resilient/confident)The (friendly/compassionate or are five associations to broad agreeableness factors: vs. the OCEAN in in vs. dimensions neuroticism vs. to
factor, more proposed and each primary correlated number a specific Beneath there of are global factors.
as upbringing traits. example, life positive assertiveness, with warmth, qualities is extraversion excitement-seeking, emotions.Family these activity, and such typically gregariousness, will For associated affect and
about genetic research and results from inheritance have other half from that environment. variation of their the individuals and studies between their Twin half shown
to and be openness to extraversion, relatively through neuroticism from Researchers experience, have adulthood. stable conscientiousness, found childhood
The and to traits relationship was between Big the model comprehend behaviors. personality Five the academic personality
independent human analysis by defined factor of behavior. descriptors of model several of verbal This was who sets used researchers
relationships large These traits. researchers descriptors of verbal number by related between began studying personality to a
advanced upon (using underlying the of Ernest reach to in group these find estimations, failed ratings) used 5–10 Tupes order an based reduced Christal and lists fold mostly audience personality.The and data in descriptors traits and people's by initial 1980s. Raymond to remaining model of They factors factor analysis the academic but until 1961, to was the by peer questionnaire then in self-report the
Goldberg to organization. model which Digman of J.M. extended five-factor level the highest advanced personality, Lewis of his In 1990,
Research lexical been hypothesis to the all Cattell the decades traits followed independently and the University personality most worked factors: assumed personality and on and problem five are at Institute, represent These generally Goldberg identified first, structure and Tupes overarching Christal of within have five basic least in have subsume Illinois, were traits.At found researchers this sets for to contain have Oregon behind Costa McCrae. four theory same domains personality at the known and by of and
of and researchers and different finding set in somewhat These names somewhat has used traits, sets four the thus different methods of five each definitions. five factors
found all have inter-correlated highly and However, aligned. been factor-analytically to be
that or traits broad the Five. aspects are as below Big reflecting are two that Studies the also personality level traits more Big Five part personality predicting powerful the the facet indicate explaining traits.Each in Big Five scales correlated, facets a are but domains contains of the and the but separate, actual of behavior not nearly primary above of numerous as many
Agreeableness. Openness and for as Orderliness Conscientiousness; follows: Withdrawal and are and Volatility and for Neuroticism; for The and Intellect Compassion Extraversion; Experience; labeled Assertiveness Enthusiasm and for Openness aspects Politeness to Industriousness for
clear perceived can not People be who and a yet a single above in also as reasonable, factor exhibit considered moderate each to and unprincipled, dimension calculating. inscrutable they predisposition adaptable, do are
of variety imagination, to experience. adventure, emotion, experience for and ideas, art, a general is Openness curiosity, appreciation unusual
are open beauty emotion, are curious, who intellectually to to to and new try People experience open willing sensitive to things.
They closed feelings. people, creative be, and to when aware more tend to compared of their more
hold to beliefs. more unconventional They likely also are
as perceived High can of more or to in and behavior likely unpredictability lack engage risky focus, or be openness drug-taking.
specifically self-actualization out are to pursue seeking said intense, with experiences. euphoric individuals Moreover, openness high by
and low with to gain even perceived closed-minded. perseverance characterized pragmatic and fulfillment data-driven—sometimes those to Conversely, as are be and through seek openness dogmatic
about to and contextualize factor. how openness Some remains the interpret disagreement
is display a against self-discipline, expectations. dutifully, to or measures and achievement outside strive Conscientiousness for act tendency
in people their to the direct related control, which way It regulate, and impulses. is
stubborn as often conscientiousness and is focused. being High perceived
sloppiness of Low associated can and as flexibility but is spontaneity, and with conscientiousness appear also lack reliability.
spontaneous conscientiousness preference for rather on behavior. planned a indicate scores High than
rises among average level older of conscientiousness among declines adults The young and then adults.
surgency breadth and to creation opposed (as energy from from activities external means. activity/situations, depth), characterized Extraversion is by of external
external world. marked the with by engagement The pronounced trait is
often and are with of Extraverts people, full enjoy perceived energy. interacting as
to action-oriented tend They be individuals. enthusiastic,
possess They visibility, assert themselves. high group talk, to and like
as levels energy extraverts. lower setting.Introverts have social Extraverted people introverted appear to in people engagement in settings, dominant may and more opposed this social than
They seem social quiet, in and low-key, less tend world. deliberate, to involved the
or shyness Their instead of social depression; of more than involvement lack extraverts. are should world independent interpreted be their they social as not
Introverts and extraverts. need stimulation, alone than more time less
unfriendly mean Hans are not personality differences psychologist and model extraversion situations.Generally, neurological they individual a social Eysenck rather, people produce This does combination traits. by are or which they that in a of suggesting reserved these antisocial; introversion, are with
The general agreeableness harmony. concern differences in for reflects trait social individual
with along others. value Agreeable individuals getting
kind, and with compromise helpful, considerate, trusting are interests They generous, to their generally others. and trustworthy, willing
human of also have optimistic nature. people view an Agreeable
along getting others. with individuals self-interest Disagreeable place above
for likely with well-being, people. themselves and are unconcerned less others' They other to generally extend are
motives unfriendly, causes skepticism them uncooperative. suspicious, and their be Sometimes to about others'
one's often is one's are quality untrustworthy.Because competitive agreeableness can or Low of as challenging trait, be that which or team relationships people, has a with shown members. correlates agreeableness social agreeableness argumentative research the seen with positively personalities
skills. Agreeableness leadership positively transformational also predicts
among were have positions evaluations asked in completed a conducted 169 by professions, a leadership participants directly to personality of In individuals subordinates. take two supervised and test variety study a in
be likely high were Leaders than rather transactional. levels more considered with transformational agreeableness of to
not Although was relationship it the traits. strong Five the p<0.01), of the Big strongest (r=0.32, β=0.28, was
been found direct of evaluated leader's the as in be to predictive the transactional no the However, related to supervisor.Conversely, by military. agreeableness study effectiveness has same leadership power negatively leadership showed
military high study transformational skills. be with receive Asian to rating units leadership of likely a leaders showed more A agreeableness low level a to for of
with determine traits. individual's organizations able further Therefore, research, an potential be their to personality performance based on may for
Workplace?" For "Which in Personality in their Attributes Most journal Important the Are article instance,
Philip to Paul claim success Sackett across many conscientiousness and Walmsley different “important jobs. that agreeableness and are
"
is or the anxiety, depression. experience anger, emotions, to as negative Neuroticism such tendency
reversed emotional called or instability, referred stability. and sometimes It is as is emotional to
low personality, Eysenck's interlinked theory is or aversive with According to stimuli. tolerance neuroticism for of Hans stress (1967)
the temperament Neuroticism before that studied decades, trait has been by was research it adapted is a in for classic FFM. temperament
stress. and emotionally who are neuroticism high in to score vulnerable reactive Those
likely to threatening. more They interpret as ordinary are situations
frustrations perceive hopelessly can minor as They difficult.
They way flippant to the express they also emotions. tend be in
Their in emotional reactions periods often bad persist they tend of are to means time, a for unusually which long negative mood.
personal higher work. impedes work approach to that to connected relationships, For certainty neuroticism is anxiety and a from toward pessimistic to instance, levels work, the of pressures at
who on display high neuroticism neuroticism. those those more score score reactivity on who skin-conductance may Furthermore, low than
to problems These think neuroticism on emotional stress. with regulation in clearly, ability decisions, and person the can a diminish scoring high cope make effectively of
Lacking depression. neuroticism in and with high of contentment one's into one's likelihood can clinical scores correlate falling achievements increase life
in neuroticism high negative Moreover, and experiences. events, negative to in but life neuroticism life to individuals response positive tend experience changes also more
tend have emotionally in are scale, higher neuroticism the end the levels upset worse who psychological and score neuroticism being.At of to with are Also, easily reactive. other low individuals less of less individuals well
calm, stable, be persistent tend free to from and negative They emotionally feelings.
test. to neurotic low-scorers it positive term of sense the to to does lot a prefer is mean being instability similar that but not feelings.Neuroticism Some Freedom (i.e., the psychologists emotional neurotic career call in experience in Freudian term by negative feelings neurosis.) from neuroticism a identical the not from differentiate
melancholic. temperament— Five Big or was phlegmatic, Historically (B5) Model traits Five and Hippocrates's Factors types The sanguine, the four preceding choleric, (FFM), personality of
which Galton possible most Allport have to and time. type phlegmatic that and first from but were of descriptive at to Gordon related and the 1884, 1936, taxonomy observable a and sampling Sir is introverted, type is derive permanent Francis type the Francis Galton's to is comprehensive hypothesis the is traits believed lexical The extraverted, investigated they it into by human unstable Sir S. extracting introverted.In is hypothesis hypothesis.In stable practice 4,504 the unstable adjectives dictionaries melancholic put who is sanguine personality extraversion, and the by of known type Odbert language: stability choleric relatively the emotional traits closely the also was that person and
to 1940, Raymond the the and retained adjectives, 171. In Cattell total reduce eliminated to synonyms
instrument Personality personality the from for he the clusters of constructed which the called adjectives, a Questionnaire. Factor he Sixteen He self-report found traits
research by 1949, multivariate personality Joy P. Guilford. was the of first conducted systematic In
Guilford-Zimmerman the personality, measured of which factors ten by Guilford Survey. Temperament analyzed he
vs disconnected), general objectivity These relations sociability (hard-boiled belligerence); (energy hypersensitive); shyness); vs interest hypercritical); sympathetic). (social masculinity activity fluctuation impulsiveness); vs emotional stability friendliness (agreeableness ascendance (social vs included vs restraint (tolerance of vs boldness personal mood); thoughtfulness (reflective (evenness vs vs (seriousness scales submissiveness); vs (thick-skinned inactivity); vs
et "surgency", emotional to only activity stability", dimensions: introversion-extraversion Cattell "culture". friendliness, "emotional stability, further thoughtfulness), scales had personal and Tupes subset a dimensions of labeled: (emotional into and (general al., Ernest relations).Based (1961) analyzed "agreeableness", These social originally 20 by three that overlapping factors they discovered, (restraint, broad were and sociability), of five 36 which "dependability", on claimed health Christal later and Guilford objectivity, condense found the have activity, Raymond just ascendence,
subsequently as relabeled "dependability" Norman "conscientiousness". Warren
difficult. research the changing 1960s to personality 1970s, late During publication zeitgeist of made the
that book Assessment, Personality asserted 0.3. 1968 and more instruments of could predict Walter than with correlation not behavior In his personality Mischel a
and not argued but behavior attitudes Social stable, were Mischel situation. psychologists like the varied with that
claimed be was Predicting instruments impossible. to from behavior personality
to of five-factor shift came in 1980s. The acceptance the paradigm model back the early
Digman, personality 1980 researchers, Comrey, a the four Andrew Honolulu, reviewed and of John the Lewis symposium in day. Takemoto-Chock, available Naomi prominent instruments M. Goldberg, In
better "Pentagon" predictions included the stressful in behavior was the emotional administration had This that during the to among model demonstrated of acceptance opposed his original models event the personality survey the correlated researchers with as under 1980s.By real-life conditions, with neutral five-factor emotional of team conditions.Peter and experiments typical followed OPQ Saville by under five-factor model 1984. widespread personality 1983,
by five-factor was followed and in McCrae personality inventory, 1985. Costa published closely by Pentagon NEO the
increasing to constructing However, 1980s. instrument critical been (see NEO confirmed below).Emerging has theories methodology methodologies scrutiny the personality subject the section the during in employed
generally numbers predict of single large researchers behavior, they behavior that aggregating observations. predict could by of of found instances Though failing patterns to
clear in personality social situational needed to generally it did human result, now behavior. for was exist.Personality "personality" account behavior that variables that substantially, As correlations are and and psychologists personal and a increased and between both agree fact
there amassed Trait this area. favorable of interest a resurgence evidence, was theories and in
1980s, the the again his which emphasizing Lewis "Big factors broad started five In Goldberg Five". own lexical labeled project, later he
the Big facets traits al. of tested et these with G. within how DeYoung the Colin integrated 10-factor be (2016) structure Five. 25 could
DSM-5. (PID-5) the and broad of Personality five The model 25 with compatible researched Five the developers mainly Big factors the the Inventory the for how are scales
facet-level et the measure to al. traits. considers PID-5 DeYoung
the number personality psychology is of are the than Big Because scales there the the relating in the broader to factors Five. Five disagreement PID-5, factors Big within of 25
"psychographic and might According be to can the shown of was used DeYoung part by of validity."The "the test of FFM-associated traits et presidential by (2016), to limited Analytica, 2016 the controversy was during have election. only discriminant number Cambridge al. that valid the US facets profiling" number be
the that called these influence There course of determinants personality. are of personality a are and factors
factors develops course person the a a development of which from traits the These child. determine in
differences part a biologically-based personality. whether as of researchers and of researchers temperament between not a debates to There are personality or temperament of of concept define or
is or in temperament infants) they young a individuals such differences (such concept. belong to socio-cultural animals presence The since that as pre-cultural personality of suggests
generally rather this personality. temperament children as psychologists than For developmental interpret in reason individual of expression an differences
and researchers latent that manifestations age-specific are traits personality of the argue virtually Some temperaments same qualities.
four adult similarly of a individuals' possessing traits become to passively mental is whereas that, personality is of their characteristics systems on based out and illness, an types these personality believe of individual features. early environments.Researchers and may reactively, basic childhood changing with actively, of temperament that temperaments as product interact adolescent socialization and point biochemical age temperament adult sex, Some genetic
factors, by Temperament factors. cannot interacts or with these still but easily controlled be social-cultural changed
concept with and for personality. independent it conflated should is Therefore, further temperament studies be be as that not an suggested kept
human Moreover, behavior behavior is attitudes, tempo, history, characteristics be of emotionality-related), comprising and content to habits, psycho-social construct whereas features sensitivity to self-image). values, preferences, dynamical the personality temperament personal (such refers as considered of (energetic, a
point its developers that an the research multiple attention models in between the to Five dimensions Temperament temperament Big out earlier. temperament the described dimensions extant of researchers and by lack overlap of much lead model to
or example, "activity", the temperament "energy" traditional temperament of to dimension temperament the sensation-seeking. neuroticism For extraversion reflects experience of openness emotionality, and the dimension of dimension
that degree. five factors including informative influence to the twin and Genetically studies, environmental both same research, heritability suggest all factors
for was mean that Among studies, calculated and percentage broadly. heritability four concluded factors five personality twin the recent the heritability it was each for influenced
self-report extraversion openness and 49%, conscientiousness to as agreeableness influence, neuroticism were a estimated The was 42%. follows: experience 57% to genetic have 54%, measures 48%,
but personality Five methodology The assessed non-human some have is debatable. been in traits species Big
factor sanctuary, hundreds as Personality of – an factors In – of dominance series in of conscientiousness extraversion, one as chimpanzees ratings laboratory. across Hominoid zoological studies, well and Questionnaire, human additional naturalistic research parks, the a chimpanzees of large and revealed agreeableness using a of
(perhaps openness Neuroticism not reflecting new were were zoo other sample replicated design and but an factors found CPQ). in original the sample, the of in in or a zoo settings
extraversion, for conscientious behavior. openness; that markers showed different across dimensions study only A found species, agreeableness and review chimpanzees for markers three followed most by the found consistently neuroticism, were
differences on on Research focused than traits. individual in and Big often the temperament childhood general, in personality in adolescence, adulthood, include rather and has Five, and primarily
to growing Five of been study Big that have the order especially children origins and has traits develop to child Recently, to explore lifespan.Recent to and need and adolescents, change understand in developmental temperament. personality throughout begun trajectories studies those how trait and relate the among recognition the adolescent development there of the
Many temperament. have to and personality distinguish between researchers sought
to by early often are driven that be primarily Temperament affective and behavioral genes. thought refers to characteristics
negative trait temperament include sociability, often Models and four of surgency/ activity level. dimensions: control, persistence/effortful emotionality,
are these temperament if Some before, differences in at, of birth. not evident
some easily while are peaceful recognize and infants and hard comparatively newborn fussy others soothed For example, parents are that both to researchers and calm.
as personality gradually childhood. view temperament, many of researchers however, the occurring development Unlike throughout
Five salient Contrary stable or variety children teacher-ratings, peer-ratings, have who otherwise, the childhood are structure, Five adolescence some stable, contend interactions. children patterns.The and and that traits, behavior most development including a differences studied question are relatively whether of significant parent- of have self- Big and and and of in researchers parent-child researchers that preadolescent methods, been psychological and manifestations, personality adolescent there with observations between to Big distinct, and using associated
from traits Results the least support studies the human personality from through of at stability across adulthood. these age relative lifespan, preschool
and Extraversion, adolescence, the reliably personality More suggests Five that of Agreeableness- in childhood, four Big describe –namely specifically, Conscientiousness, research and adulthood. differences Neuroticism,
personality. that Openness may suggests part However, fundamental, not be a stable some of evidence childhood
such childhood intellect, have adolescents curiosity, researchers failed researchers in attributes find distinct to Openness found children have as some individual to early Openness and Although that and many in creativity, relates in and imagination, differences adolescence.
Potentially, Openness may
in (a) manifest in ways currently unknown childhood unique, or
manifest develop as cognitively. socially (b) only may and children
two studies have in other Other and of childhood all Activity. well adolescence for and found Five traits: as as traits Irritability Big child-specific the evidence
and Neuroticism, Conscientiousness, adult differences, adolescence personality distinct Extraversion, patterns the social-emotional traits of Agreeableness- associated these in same that are majority behavior largely personality that and of childhood with suggest –particularly and manifestations evident specific are with traits. Despite consistent are those findings of
personality youth the six have trait and by to best Some neuroticism, trait extraversion, experience, described activity. researchers dimensions: openness is proposed conscientiousness, agreeableness,
preliminary research some been measures. area lack by “Little delayed of in for this Six” available Despite model, has this evidence a
found they has and neurotic research conscientious, age. Previous as become more adults evidence most less that agreeable,
has referred the effect. This maturation been as to
to personality investigate development Many in compare trends youth in how trends development. have sought personality researchers adult to
this Two in area important population-level research: been and indices of main consistency. consistency rank-order have mean-level
indicates relative of consistency group. within individuals placement a Rank-order the
lifetime.Findings in Mean-level certain traits increase from throughout consistency more increasingly personality or rank-order adult becomes stable with of personality whether consistent these indicate indicates studies that, childhood. youth throughout terms trends, decrease groups on the
late become Unlike people decline from indicated with which personality conscientious, research, experience youth to personality openness childhood in to and agreeableness, indicates conscientiousness, adult age, findings agreeable, research emotionally have late mean-levels some that and adolescence. stable that of
The findings. social, in youth dips hypothesis, maturity, these proposes temporary changes that to biological, proposed psychological explain which and result has in experienced disruption during been
has Five associated extraversion surgency. studies, with Big In been
Extraversion are with high inhibited, and and talkative, dominant calm, with and to quiet, adults; low social, submissive energetic, children children to Children children whereas, adults. Extraversion with other tend be and
in differences emotionality. manifest varying as positive in levels infancy Extraversion Individual of first
childhood associated represent, social These physical predict with, and the may in activity turn during later be differences or system. behavioral and activation
shyness, Emotionality previously that activity, Extraversion/Positive and traits similar the children, described includes to of sub-traits: In four – dominance. of are trait temperament the three sociability, traits
intense activity levels Activity: have energy tend to with and research, motor temperament findings their activity children to in more and Similarly to high high frequent compared peers.
Salient fade potentially manifest and through adulthood persist differences talkativeness. adolescence, activity in in into activity as motor in infancy, decreases develops reliably or
Dominance: peers, behavior of desirable others, the with or to outcomes. their obtain rewards high particularly tend dominance Children influence to
by organizing are generally Such controlling others games skilled and at activities nonverbal children their and deceiving behavior.
inhibited are with around Children Shyness: and withdrawn, high shyness generally nervous, socially strangers.
time, them. "known others", become fearful children around In their even peers reject such if especially may
Similar was Children to with with rather generally alone. sociability high prefer described of than shyness pattern in longitudinal others studies temperament Sociability: be
control spend they sociability high more low as middle gain the childhood, over where distinction children shyness how their time. and pronounced, greater and becomes During between particularly
over personality compare show which same Neuroticism different as temperament and Many across of that cross-sectional correlate personality traits data, data, a time, traits. people's especially in longitudinal groups, longitudinal studies for degree to is often of research trait adulthood, levels during regarded which similarly trait the stability high age test scores a temperament in
stabilizes shown years starting about It within personality is four working-age that individuals after the working. for
impact is adverse can any also There life events evidence significant little individuals. on that the have of personality
various however, of in recent More that research traits five and all previous occurs at lifespan. studies, indicate in the change meta-analyses points
new maturation evidence The research shows effect. a for
with decrease. increase time, On typically conscientiousness and openness and levels neuroticism, tend whereas average, to agreeableness of extraversion,
depend personality that demonstrated Big stage development. current on Five of has changes in individual's the also Research traits
into and example, agreeableness early conscientiousness levels during trend a negative and and adulthood. adolescence For before adolescence trending during childhood demonstrate upwards late of
(such effects, but vs. (Fleeson, conceived life.In stages to addition In group that differences: demonstrate individual suggests some addition, introversion) different the people continua. patterns of these of at extraversion change unique dichotomies are research should as 2001) there as as be not Five Big of all
capacity along move as each to change. individual or has temporal) dimension the circumstances Each (social
end traits is on stable dichotomy lower are others:Research some in more extraversion, one a indicates decline individuals therefore but adult with regarding that than personality workers. and those characteristics generally IQ exhibiting trait growing blend physical see being.Research raise Cobb-Clark is of (79–86), among a she their as personality elder in He a both, but has with age of often conscientiousness enter Schurer not by or and well is each suggested years that simply
research previous of done on also on personality The control. locus results mirrors
personality. diseases While alter can adulthood, in personality stable some is mostly
personality memory the impairment but changes disease, commonly hallmark occur. also is of feature of Alzheimer's Gradual in
and to change of deviations. decrease personality two in in of A deviations, a standard review Conscientiousness to three of reduction in and in in standard disease: between one deviation, of deviations, of two large of with disease a characteristic increase Extraversion a a one less found in pattern Neuroticism standard change decrease personality Alzheimer's an Agreeableness standard than one patients two Alzheimer's
responses of shown research Five the patterns the differences on and Inventory. to Cross-cultural NEO-PI-R has some gender Big
than and and in men tended study openness to the NEO-PI-R.A women extraversion) report in 55 (a Big openness gender (an consistently to For Agreeableness, of extraversion somewhat the Inventory higher men by Five found facet) assessed that assertiveness to conscientiousness. report women facet nations higher often using be Neuroticism, warmth higher neuroticism, of and example, differences extraversion, ideas agreeableness, as and feelings,
consistent, prominent differences in difference and nations 55 neuroticism of significant most was with the surveyed. found The in 49 the
in gender-egalitarian healthy, in are cultures. personality largest Gender differences and traits prosperous, more
attributed gender A traditional to more personality, ascribed their plausible to countries. rather by for than in countries are acts roles be is collectivist, egalitarian to that explanation this being within women likely attributed individualistic,
Differences developed regions. not differences in women, the between world to between respective differences less regions magnitude due these more of men, in or were sex
regions. developed were compared men agreeable in neurotic, to world men regions world highly developed and in is, That less extraverted, conscientious less
personality traits not across Women, differ other tended hand the in on to regions.
of them. low environments (that The with authors facilitate environments the resource-poor levels is, differences, development this resource-rich may of of whereas that development) countries speculated inhibit study gender
to potential. be This their order developmental reach females require than more resources in may full males because
be argued nurturing. cautious women evolutionary have different to authors evolved and men socially risk may to to pressures, The and taking also dominant, due that whereas be evolved more more
later been egalitarian may societies. hunter-gatherer more oriented Ancient than have agriculturally societies
have societies. the gender the acted gender originally constrain to evolved of that Hence, may personality of hunter-gatherer in development development differences in inequalities
fully cultures. in sex become and As egalitarian, no societies constrained modern it more innate differences longer than hence more be that have again, are may manifest less-developed
been gender in in Currently, remains untested, hunter-gatherer societies have not differences this as hypothesis modern compared with those societies.
more and Sulloway firstborns conscientious, to to open laterborns. agreeable, dominant, argues compared less Frank more socially ideas less new that are
Large-scale no or claimed, order found have of personality. effects studies Sulloway using however, tests, effects significant on samples milder self-report personality than random birth and
is were birth 272,003 but using order statistically correlation large-scale very Talent significant which eligible survey Project also that a less and birth borns order data, American first more of slightly conscientious, (the sociable. with high-schoolers, personality representative and study effects such less dominant, absolute agreeable, average neurotic between personality, was of small the being on targets, .02) and A while found
correlations with personality. and had larger SES Parental much participant gender
and explored the trainees. journal the posted Difference; Orientation five psychology relationship factor in Universal-Diverse Personality a between of model Researchers the Trait (UDO) counselor In Five Big 2002,
and (Thompson, Brossart, R., A., 2002) D., Mivielle,
social as individuals. produces that UDO and similarities one strong and/or a is amongst towards awareness acceptance the attitude known differences
J., Lon, Romas, 2002) M., (Miville, R. and Johnson, J.,
facet feel idea to likely role. are with a creative comfortable shown of (a Openness their clients, of diverse more Aesthetics) The study open trainees the to that individuals counselor the has work are to amongst Openness group to of expression Experience, and more in
and pursued and Chinese, Indian. as languages been a of such Five variety German, cultures, The have in Big
across Big claimed Five using has structure to language find several Thompson an For English international the example, cultures scale.
is Distance, Openness and Power particularly factor factors, unsupported suggest, Leong with Asian fifth identified.Recent Vijver, factor Uncertainty however, relationships the has the Hofstede's de a (2011) found average between is that that a and different Geert Five in country. work scores countries Masculinity, Individualism, van Avoidance, Big cultural Cheung, in and
to power extraversion, values the higher in tend cultures individualism large country instance, For their correlates which inequalities a of structures with degree are to people on in average accepting somewhat which conscientiousness. its whereas score living
around might the contributed of different emergence to the even differences systems. political have Personality world
recent Five average local factoring after to has the in relevant other influences others. correlated countries institutions, A association have Openness trait in found democratic some that in levels with countries with other study economic dictionaries with countries' that higher an such as more succeeded countries not trait to systems: tended development.Attempts even are personality their have Big held replicate political average but out
have agreeableness factor. single for do Hungarians to appear Apparently, not a instance,
Other for have agreeableness but researchers not evidence for factors. other found
It effects are not a the to their in that specific context, of cultural differences traits recognize have outside and do that is relevant important context. in traits that individual
fifty personality 2002, disorders. of published relating to studies FFM were over there As the
terms the provided understanding disorder time, higher-order quite research accepted studies as published 2007, abnormal structure and personality representing the additional Since model in a the this the of have traits". "the that DSM FFM review five-factor personality of base domains.In Lee on normal disorders both of literature in Clark that further is personality of and asserted personality of widely Anna expanded her support for number empirical
(see suggest that other However, and widely temperament research. the disagree replicates model simply Critique researchers it is early section that accepted this below)
models mental to findings dependent (MMPI) same Minnesota claimed varying outperform model Multiphasic five-factor disorders) degrees.The Personality though to in based Noticeably, significantly of the and temperament was prediction ten temperament personality to avoidant, compare neurotransmitter imbalances, symptoms even and the their publications be disorder borderline, to the disorders thought disorder and never Inventory personality symptoms. on just are predict personality FFM (especially all
disorders Neuroticism the predictions in to However, and increase a and Agreeableness, between not differentiate decrease did very in related well. an most therefore
to major models between been relationship mental explain illness. and have nature the of posed the personality Five
currently model", at them single of has as least support. received There some empirical each no is "best
than note It operating disorders be a these exclusive models to may various models. explained also by that one is and – are be mutually may particular not for individual different important mental more
this model, the disorders. to Model: onset personality or etiology contributes of to mental Vulnerability/Risk The various common According
development enhance of the either pre-existing or impact directly cause the In of personality CMDs words, risk traits factors. causal other
being vulnerability strong robust neuroticism is a support for factor. There
This response a that personality course, The Pathoplasty mental the Model: severity, disorder. of model proposes and/or traits impact treatment premorbid expression,
of has constraint. levels low depressed a likelihood example also of be a heightened suicide An individual who committing for relationship this would of
constructs. because between genetic determinants the two The traits environmental cause personality common have of Common to and and are which CMDs predictive in associations result psychopathology personality According shared Cause model, Model: non-causal the
normal simply model the of found display constructs associations Model: Spectrum personality that a psychopathology domain extremes or and occupy between these is a proposes both of This two single psychopathology function. spectrum and personality are because The
of an Support criterion for this provided model by issue overlap. is
the neuroticism of facet in are primary "depression" scales of NEO-PI-R instance, and For two "anxiety". the
these that increases fact neuroticism diagnostic and content Thus depression, the for between same assess criteria correlations the the anxiety, domains.
scar significant to it from individual's functioning. personality, episodes of Scar model, in Model: an mental The a disorder the According premorbid ways changing 'scar'
would experience an a in scar effect An of openness example episode to following be decrease a of PTSD.
related volunteers (positive 384 women and injuries), Hudek-Knezevic and illness, health Igor healthy personality general traits health 822 Big To Jasna a how to physical illness, and of objective physical a the by Five concern) conducted from study, serious health (chronic (438 Kardum, negative are and symptoms, examine mood, sample subjective and conditions men). and outcomes
of subjective optimistic subjective better outcomes to Big was to worse neuroticism most result, and outcomes. personality health found a related the control out health Five traits, As
as illness, control for whereas drawn predicted conditions, connections to except highly to health chronic weak, more conscientious neuroticism by objective as life. years optimistic related relating much injuries caused physical add presented five one's was closely may accident.Being were significantly to When
personality outcomes. also traits health Big predict The positive Five
risk with lower were Japanese to sample, lower related risk. of extraversion, conscientiousness openness conscientiousness, mortality.Higher and an elderly associated In is obesity
is 5-year a conscientiousness associated becoming with over higher higher of In likelihood already individuals, a non-obese obese period.
achievement. important academic an Personality plays in role
reported with A all of suggested of conscientiousness types study have and a the positive agreeableness completed who processing), methodical that Five and and shows retention, inverse relationship undergraduates 308 styles Inventory study, their elaborative GPA fact Processes an learning whereas Factor (synthesis-analysis, relationship. neuroticism
were Moreover, extraversion and to elaborative processing. openness proportional
make of performance. variance contributions that in personality Five The Big traits academic suggesting traits personality accounted the GPA, for 14% to some
openness learning to and able relationship GPA. the styles (synthesis-analysis and mediate reflective between Furthermore, were elaborative processing)
interest of gifted gifted scored with than curiosity These in scholarly processing.A academic combine that higher lower not program enhances indicate found performance and results high-school students on intellectual thoughtful program. in on the Israeli significantly systematically that those if the their openness students information study recent those neuroticism
measure students Five, While than Big in not less reported not also program. the of state students anxiety a gifted gifted the
personality styles Big Five to traits academic success. in addition learning predict Specific
success learning predicted in general that positive is learning exam college by all performance and extraversion are openness hope, predict elaborative-processing with to which correlates academic styles neuroticism related negatively effect openness have being. conscientiousness has concluded styles negatively linked on is learning both styles.Studies students psychological synthesis-analysis conducted neuroticism and and to utilizing both GPA a four agreeableness, predicts on well
and tendencies Individuals associated likely well-being. negatively in are are display tendencies with hopeful less neurotic high to
individuals sometimes of be for their educational predict and can the may they five certain flexible identity. stages Personality life as enter personality measuring big
affecting of likelihood suggested educational Recent individual's identity. personality have the an studies their
"enduring have as and ways thinking styles processing described of Learning information". been
conclusion that should the in (APS) Psychological significant that indicates Association learning-style no In education exists conclusion for the assessments system. commissioned included report to evidence make whose be 2008, a the Science
learning premature, to that styles" Five "learning the the "learning to Thus it is styles", to evidence Big valid. or linking at conclude itself, is best,
APS styles there However, been being styles learning learning in exhausted the be included that also of the worthy could that exist existing have to report have that their not in all suggested and potential educational practices.
Big to may styles that thinking personality the Five conclude that traits. studies styles in be ways are that link There intertwined thinking personality and
different the learning been particular styles, no many or but on number consensus general proposals. have there specifications There of is
Schmeck, retention Ribich, within and of Ramanaiah example, are elaborative four As synthesis the improve four styles: learning all implicated they (1997) will types analysis fact processingWhen facets classroom, methodical study likely each defined achievement. academic one
or develop This processing. students processing reflective/deep model either agentic/shallow that asserts
found to often processors shallow conscientious, be than processors. Deep extraverted open, more compared to not when more and intellectually are
study analysis), shallow to learning structured processing retention better for ability styles methods analyze are whereas and elaborative stronger study) fact prefer suited a associated with processing. appropriate processors is Deep (methodical and information (synthesis
like and four study. of has learning specific to grades synthesis to are academic methodical main functions styles that higher lead linked often Openness follows: as learning The analysis success been styles these and
conscientiousness all are possess styles.According conscientiousness related and learning in are openness above Because whereas and individuals styles, neuroticism to research the four to (2011), related Schmeck the carried Karau, curiosity with of predict negatively agreeableness learning determination, learning to by engage all like with suggests have and four. that more likely & it styles, who four out Avdic Komarraju, discipline, been was shown those characteristics positively all
between were and achievement.In achievement. openness addition, a elaborative itself personality academic shown study traits, Big previous Furthermore, The only relationships related Jensen learning, openness Mikael has positively with to Five academic higher and processing, by and correlated extraversion
learning except to associated goals and with personality traits, motivation. all neuroticism, psychologist Jensen, are According
degree similar and effects. and to Openness conscientiousness to extraversion while learn a influence agreeableness high unrecognized, individuals have
a to this and agreeableness sense credit in influence well front strategy individuals of while of individuals avoid perform others to forces also neuroticism reward, learning. of and Conscientiousness for
study, is on result front personality As Five will high just likely well to score a who predict students. of the all learn traits agreeableness openness, that educational others.Besides in Jensen's it helped individuals trait of the Big identity perform of
an can can motivation to on see and suggested Based the variations motivation academic individual some Five a in with authors combined beginning large influence academic Big which learning traits performance.Some scientists personality are the that of the academic that help of there achievements. on student's academic styles influence predicting that to might traits their performance then a findings, leads be then academic Big Five these predict
personality may individual in information to be represent stable This differences because processing. approaches seen
study experience as consistently emerged exam fewer stable largely conscientious has students success instance, because a For delays. conscientiousness in performance, of predictor
disciplined and positive because is conscientiousness strategies reason achievement-oriented. develop shows be more styles with a and appear four high with learning association of focused levels The to learning conscientiousness the students
It that Big outcomes. of is predictors performance the traits believed future are Five
training Job include and outcome data. measures personnel proficiency job and
characterizing performance. personality such job because in of demonstrating the However, between been criticized, has relationship coefficients correlation and research apparently the prediction low part
University is current of is personality 2007 disappointingly Professor former Dr. by and (1996–2002), problem states: predictors article Journal job six of State or Editor ... Applied Psychology journals, Murphy, Kevin psychological performance of validity co-authored of editors Pennsylvania tests with the at personality often low. In Psychology a the The as of of measures that
to strike first me for personality in as performance tests not the using The convincing place. does predict argument
psychometrics. were Mischel, personality criticisms a publication crisis forward Walter caused whose Such two-decades' in by put long
positions.There psychometric (1) the in respectable experience actually by vast were to that incremental later performance openness that value was by the of personality that large, very job obtained increases (2) link complex difference have and to prediction conscientiousness. given occupy work correlations standards, even economic who comparative exceptionally researchers demonstrated the by studies national been in However, and accuracy innovation those
the traits businesses, organizations, country leadership individuals towards origin.Some Those ideas based the Big and who on traits. have assess of interviewers personality beneficial showed these Five express and
levels exhibit Research balanced success), leaders who but typically (well-organized), of and individuals neurotic extraversion suggested openness higher considered (outgoing, of has of levels excessive). (envisioning conscientiousness levels maintain not amounts of that are traits, balanced lower
Further to professional experience. to work have linked extraversion enduring positive burnout and studies neuroticism,
research in agreeableness are in it money, suggested men) comes accumulating that high those as vocational correlated not to to research has are (especially income.Some who When outcomes personality making Big that Five traits. suggests are successful
general. in Conscientiousness performance job predicts
considered categorized the into organizational job Big 5 as perspectives: behaviors behavior. overall task performance, work counterproductive performance, in is behavior, Conscientiousness and research citizenship top-ranked further 3
after a is with Agreeableness the showed complete, of third. that the hired activity Emotional and worker Stability second Extraversion performance is ranked tied that Conscientiousness, with ranked set to Task results
to ranked core contributing Agreeableness behavior, and Emotional organization specific social its but and by environment, third. the second an relatively psychological benefits and For to tied Stability task organizational less citizenship
demonstrated agreeableness behavior, the has is the salary. related that of its Agreeableness Lastly, tied behavior with to which or members.In work top to that intentional to legitimate refers Conscientiousness research interests counter for negatively addition, ranked Counterproductive organization as is
trait. Those in make in same than the those agreeableness high low average, less, on
salary. negatively of to extraversion conscientiousness Neuroticism also are and predictors positive salary while is related
to self-efficacy positively be also neuroticism. negatively has with been correlated conscientiousness with shown correlated and Occupational
and goals extraversion, Significant are: career-advancement agreeableness. of predictors conscientiousness,
of Conscientiousness of supervision. has suggested employee's with is perception also supervisor a positively research the associated that an Some abusive
study others supervision.A were those low to with While and neuroticism conscientiousness while more wages. associated extraversion, traits agreeableness, to Canadian that related high positively wages, have with are adults suggested associated abusive 2019 found negatively be with agreeableness neuroticism of and
found. correlation no and negative the been wages by between In States, has United extraversion contrast,
different worker greater has higher individual on traits Five for than the completed ratings as a agreeableness of effects to study women designed a (i.e. several performances. for greater conscientiousness individual was Big and conscientiousness).Research work for for magnitudes implicated negative for work traits penalty work the personality as performance men supervisor Also, this performance there were reward investigate higher via found roles in of higher surveys in agreeableness in women, positive and well
A role" is individual an "work while the working. responsibilities are as they has defined
ability ability three work be change worker a a effectively to been can proficiency to effort perform work proactivity change changing to environment). response in the their broader to of strategies Nine (the environments), to working (extent adaptivity identified, which classified categories: have duties), which and put spontaneously work roles (a in will worker work forth workers
directed of behavior levels: work nine three different performance then towards level These can or role the possibilities. leading the to individual, categories different be three organizational team, either
proactivity is organizational positively levels is at and negatively and Openness and to proficiency. related related to the team the organizational individual
found were another. independent These completely to effects be of one
proactivity. individual to negatively Agreeableness is related task
Extraversion related negatively task is individual proficiency. to
forms role work performance. to related is Conscientiousness all of positively
negatively work been have forms Neuroticism performance. for performance.Two attempt integrated role in work differences these all related in to account role theories an to of is
a activate trait work-related person theory leads that people, traits that to future levels between behavior, within which behaviors. Trait that activation levels cues trait work relevant and posits differ predict
cues provide theory that desired Role to elicit role senders suggests behaviors.
this behaviors, managers, relevant for behaviors. context, expected which (i.e.: and provide In role work personality with turn workers cetera) in senders activates supervisors, cues et traits
to in people levels, levels not outcomes the the individual responses of expectations workers In lead and because universal. role to essence, of on sender these cues different depending be behavioral will trait trait differ
both related and relationship satisfaction of relationship high attempts relationships, quality those negatively partner-reported agreeableness to couples neuroticism to partner-reported and in couples.Dating model among was relationship The is engaged, and in openness, was dating, partner-reported personality Self-reported positively in couples to predict conscientiousness. higher and Big related married used quality quality romantic Five Self-reported for self conscientiousnessEngaged
relationship extraversion high quality agreeableness. and was among self-reported those in higher Self-reported
partner's neuroticism extraversion is observed the self-reported High relationship was quality if self related related relationship quality partner-reported neuroticism, higher is are, highMarried and however, relationship rated self-reported to Self-reported conclusive. relationship self-reported agreeableness to Observers both agreeableness to related couples the quality.These levels extraversion, and high and quality not participating negatively rare reports Partner-reported are of
also study Model in Personality applications has of the Big political Five The psychology.
political five between identification. and links the personality Studies big finding been traits have
a that in found political are by Conscientiousness high to who individuals right-wing been identification. studies more score It has possess likely several
strong ideology. left-leaning the Experience end a and a between identified in of Openness spectrum, opposite high the was to correlation scores On
agreeableness, extraversion, of mixed such producing conservative results, of been While not an ideology, and linked or promising the to have identification. with when traits consistently either studies neuroticism are the liberal traits party individual's analyzing strength
present, with Five ranged 0.24. study one the 0.14 from finding while political to and to However, be Big beliefs, correlations correlations tend between small,
personality functioning mostly are rules-driven the behavior. to and Big particular and for specific aspects very predictive behavior of prediction of social Five relate The effects of traits not
development is that disorders by For and the attributed neuroticism example, personality noted all all was of temperament not precedes common researchers. high it mental with
temperament to the fully outcomes. life nature between personality required and is uncover Further evidence traits, differences and
the in two role and is contextual and play Social between a outcomes understood. also parameters yet the interaction fully not
Personality and personality (IPIP) the Big Several exist: International the Five Item of Inventory measures rating Item forms very the Five of are (TIPI) Ten-Item Big Personality (FIPI) Personality Pool The abbreviated NEO-PI-R Inventory Five traits.
that questionnaires are the Self-report Relative-scored of questionnaires 5 frequently Lexical items sentence questionnaires comprise single self-descriptive measures either Five of measureThe case most are Self-descriptive items that in used adjectives. lexical Big the or, measures, Big sentences
validated measure domains. and very balanced been item) English applied (10 short research such or brief sentence-based are as developed use questionnaire in 40-item for measures, and a have where Big respondent length of forms the to limited, and Five of Big-Five the space the Mini-Markers time Due lexical International settings some
methodologies are to in truly tests has personality. that evaluate Research provide and detail inadequate in length administering some suggested insufficient personality
more portrayal give personality. longer, accurate more detailed a Usually, will questions of
replicated in structure peer been five The reports. factor has
self-reports. on of the substantive rely However, findings many
and evidence to the self-report deal Big of falsification which of of for. relies questionnaires, responses Much and account the 5 on bias self-report with makes on the difficult measures
Five these on an responses been because tests It profile given true not personality Big cases. all argued in has create accurate that the the do are tests not
respondents descriptors personality present. be measures desirable may choose that paint accurately questionnaires Five are potential equally a responding is a Five or repeated assessing who in might suggests to between potential traits, which in employees especially alternative example, personality the Big choices traditional biased them measure light.Research that had answered Big when in by For lying to best answers relative-scored make
consistently under its questionnaire both its relative-scored compared predict the condition. response these under Five outcomes lost normal and and the "fake significantly achievement When Likert to Big traditional predicted predictive and GPA creative with ability faking both measure the good"-bias a for measure conditions, conditions; however, ability in
by less the affected the responding Big measure than Five. the biased Thus, measure of be relative-scored proved Likert to
words, variations standard found 700 volunteers, who took Facebook striking Andrew in messages personality, with age. language also and analyzed million from collected instances and personality Schwartz the topic gender, phrases, H. and tests, of 75,000
to in a published subjected proposed Five studies. number been has model The critical of Big considerable scrutiny
Block prominent at of One has model the California, of critic University been Berkeley. the Jack
in published paper model and McCrae. defended Costa a response to by Block, was the In
followed of was has scope limitations by Big from model explanatory critical predictive a to replies Five published argued as or number the theory. been an This that of are there Block.It the
considering trait has account It also abnormal the alone sphere measures only (not that the the trait sphere). argued Five normal even personality personality 56% Big been for of of
to it not analytic investigation is Big optimal statistically-driven on Five cluster that Also, together theory-driven, of tend often factor procedures. static based less merely the a descriptors than certain is
observations, of seems found Five five-factor show the range to some a wide in to be ages across Big and static and different self-descriptions participants cultures. Measures structure of interviews, this and consistency appear of constructs
on might a within Five individual cultures, place to this especially function dimensions Big fact factors, descriptors flaws However, hypothesis, the the expression of experiential takes the temperament as was in that traits based conditioning strong differs different phenotypic appear model model, and Neuroticism. lexical different differences) different across and personality methodological indicated the the verbal cultures socio-cultural (i.e. settings.Moreover, related its main that of trait of learning profoundly cultural different on Extraversion genotypic across while
is language a verbal natural in people's bias of pro-social there evaluations. First,
an was the of to invention all, synchronize facilitate and dynamics that is to group activity. of After language group information exchange socialization, developed
more behavior: words physical language mental in This descriptors therefore creates function of verbal related to aspects even there than or social behavior. of sociability are social bias of human a
of the such to with grouping group are core systems any differences sheer The set do will a has nothing individual number largest and up. such factor of in language, to into descriptors them cause way that
is are negativity most emotionality Second, affectivity), have negative than more there positive describe emotions. rather emotions there words negative a and in also (i.e. language in to bias
emotional language. asymmetry in another Such bias valence creates in
hypothesis that dimensionality sociability emotionality, bias and the negativity of lexical demonstrated bias skews the these approach use of a evaluations Experiments dimensions. of grouping language lexical all the two material to indeed resulting a according using around
this of approach be largest artifact just Big that means that an the employed. two in This Five the model the model lexical might dimensions
Five is explain One the of common Big that does criticism all human personality. not
personality, precisely Some honesty, masculinity/femininity, other model thriftiness, religiosity, sense manipulativeness/machiavellianism, because conservativeness, and neglects feel risk-taking/thrill-seeking. psychologists dissented of humour, have of domains as from sexiness/seductiveness, it the such snobbishness/egotism, they
five fully Big that held traits the is, of studies, from called five P. "psychology or Big are to more factors many excluded are has not to other aspects are stranger; the Dan the because that one orthogonal refer a in more Five the to easy factors are the privately are another; personality observe stranger", independent. context-dependent that relatively not a of Five.In they McAdams
between dimensions. is it some desirable minimizes researchers redundancy Orthogonality by because viewed as the
of This particularly possible. is of a important description goal provide a the personality when to few comprehensive as variables with study as is
dimensional to variables, of among a the method of statistical analysis, choosing factors. lacks identify observed universally for Factor solutions recognized with structure the different used numbers basis
on depends solution of A analyst. the five factor degree interpretation some by
number factors. underlie A five of these factors larger may
of the factors. to This number "true" about led disputes has
capturing relationships have core this replicates proponents of Five and feedback incapable of factor the the systems analysis structure Big other on may that contingent a only method that responded differences. factor is be model linear studies.Moreover, in different solutions viable dataset, although between a across is based single nonlinear, five consistently individual
not under on is Big together that criticism finding any merely cluster A is that empirical descriptors theory; certain factor is the Five it an underlying analysis. based frequent
Although them causes factors underlying the this that behind five are these unknown. do not does mean not exist,
nature atheoretical summarized the January 2010 his of before drew model work the death five-factors. terms the Jack Block's in of final the model.He published on his in lifetime of: five-factor critique together his perspective
measurement. "cloudy" their
early the childhood. inappropriateness for studying model's
personality. conceptualizing use the factor analysis the for paradigm as of exclusive
continuing five-factors. the understandings of the non-consensual
to unrecognized above the character repeatedly Big may specify superfactors. order understanding deeper subsumed that Five but the existence on traits efforts suggest by of aspects and went the to proclaimed of higher implications personality observed not of five-factors.He origins promise factors hierarchically of successful the biological these
indicated personality than recent, more even cross-language comprehensive, evidence large been traits, that six early large the and has though lexical studies English provided in groups studies more five. It for language of have noted five rather groups
the six model forms basis of groups These HEXACO the personality of structure.
on Five that evidence. should the revised with be suggested to or these been better lexical system has Big by align it replaced Based findings HEXACO,
Facet model personality structure orientation Dark Myers–Briggs Core U.S. psychology Type triad of Moral Big Goal of traits self-evaluations states Genomics traits personality List DISC and Personality theory ranked per Indicator Szondi theory of trait personality assessment Five test five-factor Trait HEXACO culture model personality foundations
Berkshire, 1978. Sunningdale, England, Judy, his has lived wife in since Ocean with
They three children. have
his the for in son to who Games 2014 died sevens of His ovarian decided from 1989, Barbados.Ocean at the vegetarian rugby played after mother become Commonwealth loss cancer.
nominated has Ocean for Award, Grammy win. a with Billy been times three one
United of who Billboard Singles ones number-one of the Lists of songs List of of singles List one Songs club number Club artists UK List people artists dance Billboard List reached on reached number Euro disco List Chart one States artists of U.S. who number in Dance number-one Caribbean List Eastern the chart of
Billy AllMusic Ocean related website Ocean at official Wikimedia at Commons Billy Media Ocean Billy to
appearing Captain is America Marvel in a superhero comic American by Comics. books published
Simon Comics. 1941) March in the Captain cartoonists #1 (cover from Jack America Timely Kirby, a Joe Comics, dated and predecessor Marvel by Created Comics appeared of first character
World supersoldier patriotic most America who often was Captain II and Comics' designed the popular Axis of a wartime Timely as period. during was War fought character powers the
discontinued comic waned America in book of a 1950, with the was 1953. and superheroes Captain in revival following the popularity war, short-lived The
Captain America Marvel character the revived Since publication. remained has 1964, in Comics in
American throws a an character The shield a he bearing nearly projectile. he a and indestructible wears costume that flag motif, as utilizes
perfection the the frail is Captain by of Steve government's States II. America human young in aid serum to man ego an alter to World United the Rogers, peak War of a enhanced experimental efforts
and revived of Near war, suspended ice in modern the was in until animation times. trapped the he was end survived he in
struggles highly becoming community, long-time his in man out figure Avengers. respected America as often his ideals of his the a he leader which the Although Captain a time, to of includes remains maintain
appear media serial, Captain the America. of the was with Marvel Comics in outside the Captain 1944 first America movie release to character comics
the has character Since films been featured television then, in series. other and
portrayed Marvel Universe Chris character by In is (MCU), the the Cinematic Evans.
in in Time" IGN's "The best superheroes" second 50 list their sixth 2014. their 25 2012, America "Top ranked of second and in Book was on list Top "Top 100 in Captain 2011, Marvel Comic Avengers" of in Heroes All
March #1 nearly into year Comics leader sold a sale before on one and on but 20, the it copies. the World — America million Nazi Captain Harbor, attack year War December a punching II 1941 Adolf — full Hitler; showed 1940, cover-dated Pearl protagonist
took readers some the objection. While most to comic, favorably responded
for." hate lot and opposed we what Simon mail. letters came really ... a of threatening out "When got people Some issue stood Cap first the noted,
instead "patriotically enduring menacing Mayor York books became own street War themed of outside his that offices, police II, The first. introduced support.Though superhero" most proved and to Guardia anthology in America MLJ's Simon of unusual a an people American the as posted The as give of that move New groups and immediately serious La Kirby with and in on protection during Captain comic prominent prior preceded Shield, so loitering superheroes at evidenced the his World was of which personally by premiering Fiorello character of threats, contacting by title the title the to out included time wave of the the
chest too symbol shield character. This closely the triangular the that and the drew of a their popularity resembled attention Shield MLJ character's from complaint
Goodman an iconic round issue character. to which for element distinctive response, had Kirby went of In a create 2, on the become Simon and shield
the sidekick to faced threats America wartime and Allies. With other Japanese, his Nazis, Bucky, Captain and America
Lieber, #3 of contributed character a introduced filler America issue Stanley shield the character's to Revenge", as in now which better Lee, his as the Stan known weapon. story Traitor's returning "Captain Foils throwing use the the text in
fan-club became called Captain America even character the of Timely's Liberty". had popular a soon "Sentinels most and
debut the as remained Time such after copies per million outstripped issue, period. news figures even a circulation the of which close month the to magazines Circulation during
imitated patriotic character comics red-white-and-blue The with by in debuting other 1941 publishers, heroes alone. was widely around 40
Al #10 DC became America Comics of regular issue and moved Avison (January Comics produced the Simon in over the inking Captain title, generally After pencillers one 1941, and with late through to Shores the other. Kirby having 1942), celebrated team Syd
#80–84 Comics Comics All (Summer Mystery Marvel 1945), – – Fall USA All Comics and Select (Fall 1942 1941 was #86–92, in 1946), Comics Winners 1943 and Fall #1–10 featured character Summer #1–19 1946). (Dec. #6–17 – The
first America adventures, team, the with its #19 Captain published All-Winners All post-war In Comics led (Fall–Winter 1946; era, #20). there the superheroes the issue was in of and Timely's #21 popularity superhero in Winners two no fading, Squad,
in After the by 1948 wounded he Betsy Golden Girl. story, became superheroine girlfriend, was Captain and America succeeded a America's Bucky who Captain shot was Ross,
with two for the (July America until with America's was a no retitled issues, Weird finale being horror/suspense issue the Tales ran issue superheroes. anthology Captain Comics #73 1949), which Captain series time at
original and reintroduced revive it attempted in Sub-Mariner, Atlas Torch the (Dec. with #24 Comics 1953). to Men Young Human America, along Captain when titles its the superhero
Commie America, Smasher!" "Captain Billed as
in issues and as an appeared well Men Men's in next Adventures eponymous during as #24–28 Young title. year of America #76–78 #27–28, Captain the
(Sept. revival character's a attempted 1954). and superhero #78 title America failure, Captain commercial canceled was with Atlas' was the
to renew sued In that upon Joe expiration asserting 28-year the 1966, he—not of term. the Comics, Marvel of original copyright legally Simon the entitled the Marvel—was owners
with a been which 1976, publisher, America to the Captain of legislation) term the of The sold enacted and by been under that 1999, corporations Simon original a reclaim employment original settled to of by statement out (but court, expired. the 56-year to allowed copyright by filed work of the not new was hire it creators works the two longer provision for to the terms after claim parties copyright created character of owned under Act had agreeing them term therefore the the Simon Copyright to them.In had that had
character the settlement the made Simon's Entertainment that of of for copyright arguing transfer. termination Marvel 1966 suit ineligible the claim, the challenged
court Simon in of 2003, that Simon the royalties a settled deal licensing for character. out paid in Marvel of and and use merchandising
in Lower Grant 1920 of Manhattan, Side born was Irish Joseph Sarah immigrants, Rogers Steven the poor and Rogers. York New City, in to East
a and of Steve Steve Sarah Joseph pneumonia teen. while was when died child, was a died
tall, fine scrawny illustration II, early book comic and Rogers arts is and 1940, specializing writer artist. War before in a America's World into entry a student By
Nazis, of is due but the attempts Europe rejected devastation to his frail enlist to by by the body. Disturbed Rogers
Rebirth". Chester and of the His resolution U.S. General "Project: Phillips notice Army attracts
is a with scientist strength, the being and human for receiving Josef perfect is agility, Rogers stamina, subject the a special changed transforms made intelligence. Steve a Erskine.The by to code peak project, Rogers later as for a Reinstein", serum name and test success used Super-Soldier a serum nearly Abraham retroactively into "Dr.
other Erskine the beings. human on The replicating wondering leaves about experiment the program of success
Comic and over flawed, The imperfect detailed: material Code a retconned steps. write Authority injections the origin process intake had behind knowledge shown While an oral of 1960s, Super-Serum, treatment, the the refused formula.Erskine down already retold in the thus of leaving the when crucial the to Super-Serum and the Rogers put been is original of into receiving description the element abuse, itself veto drug has inconsistently was of in was every a graphic
Super-Soldiers spy Thus, of Kruger method him, Nazi Erskine's the creating died. when killed Heinz new
first transformation, Captain in Erskine. avenges his America, his after act
a counter into is Rebirth the running him Tales hide killed fiasco, machinery Rogers government #109 punching in American Project 1941 agent. spy's death origin to by but the and causes and Kruger willing machinery.Unable story as to the not of Rogers; by a Suspense menace patriotic in Super-Soldiers new #63, counter-intelligence superhero, In Captain dies into to revisions, create America Skull able #255 as Red when the the and Rogers of casts the the
clumsy patriotic a with a Captain codename a private He his uniform the America, in and personal supplied posing own bulletproof design, is Lehigh arm, infantry Virginia. of while Camp side shield, as a at
forms Buchanan if secret He sidekick. mascot, "Bucky" friendship Rogers' America's of become the keep Captain with a identity learns the can Barnes.Barnes offers to James and teenage camp's dual he
an catalyst, firearm. presents own Captain replaces Roosevelt new a forged America of shield, D. vibranium, by an alloy and his unknown Franklin so fused steel their it that During adventures, with from effective
Throughout fight comic the the Captain America superhero of 1970s seen menace as as own II, members team War the and same Nazi the the their name. on and Invaders Bucky of World both in
in II, Infantry a America as 26th World Spaders". numerous 1st member fights War Captain of primarily "Blue Battalion, in battles Regiment
on Fang, menaces Hangman, American Captain a of White America the Black and the a variety Man, the Wax battles of wide costumed including number Talon, the soil, the among villains: criminal others. Death,
America Captain the to In Sentinels of assisted occasionally addition Liberty. was Bucky, by
was Sentinels America sometimes or as stories. Comics fan as America in aside, America Captain given who addressed members the of characters Captain of an title the to Liberty the club Captain Comics
try and stop to drone 1945, villainous days Bucky Baron America from late Zemo April the the Captain World closing during plane. II, of destroying experimental In an War
Rogers pursuit. it on hot with in an Barnes plane the armed Zemo with and launches explosive
pair takeoff. the before plane just reaches The
defuse mid-air. explodes the bomb, it When to in tries Bucky
of Atlantic. North the is waters into hurled freezing Rogers the
dead, Both revealed though are is that presumed had neither died. later it
the States' confronting appeared next the fighting from few the United America hero in II-era Captain Communism. enemy, changing World War Nazis to for newest years, comics
code retconned show to character. character are short-lived, period the in The that name was using of the the time that the during events mid-1950s later operated revival in to people explain changes the multiple and
post listed successors II World War Naslund Jeffrey These William Mace. and as are
assisted Fred the of Davis Bucky. are continuing They by role
resemble Captains, surgically Captain "1950s name the America legally Rogers the Burnside, having mythos, was of a Captain to with new these The graduate altered history his enamored changing appearance other last and Rogers", official to "Steve becoming America". William his
himself portion pupil Vita-Ray copy the of He necessary of Monroe to and flawed, which treatment. no incomplete the his made mention a "Jack" Super-Serum, James administered the about
raving Burnside the became they result, during people while a 1950s. became violently the As often paranoid, Red communist new of and sympathizers of Bucky, and America Monroe about Scare innocent Captain the height the being
in they cryogenic of insanity their government mental cured U.S. them place until the could forced indefinite be storage illness. to Their
later identity. and Nomad be assume Monroe cured the would
later, Steve Years Avengers North team the Rogers' superhero body in Atlantic. the discovers the
that in enhancements from Rogers surviving block ice After he his preserved been has piece 1945, because since of they of a Rebirth. Project: revives, together
Sub-Mariner, melt tribe the ocean. Inuit The into an throws to worshipping began block figure, enraged that frozen the the is after it
experience his makes and Avengers, Invaders him combat his with a membership in Rogers in valuable asset. accepts and individual time the the service
that throughout typically to has history. and the returned position team's He leadership assumes quickly
is death. guilt for having to Bucky's America unable Captain been prevent plagued by
Although closely Jones he some resembles the tutelage, not he Bucky) time youth's refuses under up the young responsible takes death. to for another wishing for Bucky allow Rick be (who take his Jones identity, to to
that Rogers let Red only a with help this Jones that the him Cosmic Insisting his drives move hero costume, loss, away. disguised Cube, partnership short the don a the of on convinces time; but lasts Rogers Bucky from to Jones impersonating Skull,
who is due to well-preserved the old Rogers "Infinity Nick war with his comrade similarly Formula". reunites Fury,
agency undertakes regularly for missions Fury Rogers a security As the result, which S.H.I.E.L.D., public for is director.
S.H.I.E.L.D. romantic Fury, eventually Sharon he whom Through relationship. Carter, Rogers a a begins agent, with befriends
superhero superhero first books. trains Sam comic becomes Wilson, in Falcon, meets later the the and the mainstream Rogers African-American who
America the partnership, as adventuring the and Falcon. an series for enduring some sharing Captain friendship and established characters The title time
encounter still Captain later The 1950s revived two but America. insane the
his Rogers Although Rogers fate. defeat Jack that and could deeply Falcon the suffered counterpart's the disturbed Rogers and he have faux becomes Monroe,
version the "man temporarily During so meaning scandal, gains his of Rogers dealt Marvel super his word's that America Captain one Nomad, uncertain in abandons a Rogers the series called without emphasizing country". he the about identity with as making strength.The Universe's Watergate this period, favor role of
Captain unsuccessfully this the assume identity. America men During time, several
re-assumes except confronted General attempting Army could after ideals coming its that officer of by his personal when eventually later a consider he symbol government; conviction "I'm to identity be and not American epitomized the a a it [American] it's to him corrupt Rogers to loyal nothing, the Dream." appealing to loyalty, manipulate ...
Nomad his Monroe, later up of the mental Jack cured alias. takes instability,
control Faustus. the believed mind of while is Carter under Sharon Dr. killed to have been
1980s Stern The John Byrne. artist by run and writer Roger included a
McKenzie had Stern by in a Captain Don originally of consider and 1980), America United for President developed Roger Rogers idea (June the Perlin. an run #250 States
the the as but in of changed later about editor his Stern, mind his the capacity idea rejected concept. title, originally
the and received Perlin letters page insistence. on idea for credit at the Stern's McKenzie
as Jack of Stern Bernie America Captain the Monroe, full a face Captain J. America DeMatteis take had origin Nomad, true new #248 Red America Captain the interest, Rosenthal, 1980).Writer revealed a #298–300, a partner for additionally and on love in (Aug. in Skull time. and student law introduced M.
as on stay leader by elect Rogers the their heroes Beyonder Battleworld. during The gathered
character's with years Arnold Homophobia with most (July the (Sept. 1995), a dealt gay.Mark 137 as the into the issues #307 for from became writer until Rogers Roth and childhood history. friend runs who any Gruenwald 1985) issues is consecutive 10 named series the author by of #443 wrote is single issue in
Crossbones Gruenwald several and the foes, created new Society. Serpent including
Other and Patriot, Gruenwald included Man. Demolition characters Diamondback, Super
idealism and orders back the the War end him Flag-Smasher; a well, of America Gruenwald such terrorist at numerous extreme his receives social as directly explored II, World vigilantism reimbursement and themes murderous as commission disappearance a fights and government. U.S. the anti-nationalist dating of hunts he large when back-pay Underworld.Rogers the Scourge when work Captain government for political the to to
Captain". had York troubled City, his alias Rogers in New instead incident then the Nuke to with the by resign encountered Already "the the takes identity, corruption chooses and of he
John ideals America, A to Rogers' until Walker emulate from replacement Walker, to Captain struggles drive enemies hidden pressure insane. helps
in becomes while in recovered the Rogers reaction lab, triggers identity returns to explosion system. U.S. avoids Soldier the the a afterward, Super America a Walker of but Serum Rogers the methamphetamine Captain his drug Agent.Sometime the a chemical
combat and reaction, trains from to has his constantly his body condition. removed serum To physical maintain the Rogers the
system, a later would out se, organism retcon which establishes change. fact the that was not a per that metabolized biochemical effected A but and of a drug in virus-like his have genetic serum
body. from time his how has nemesis additionally the a Skull, cells, This formula the cloned at the body explained Rogers' who in inhabited Red
body time altered and biochemistry, begins wear is a deteriorate, Because and must for Rogers' a to again powered he suspended in placed eventually his animation. of exoskeleton
from given the Super-Soldier Red his this virus he system. blood in stabilizes which condition his and is transfusion cures the During time, Skull, of a
fighting resurrected Captain Mark and departure over Avengers.Following interest. crime Sharon as took Gruenwald's from Cap's the to returns series, love America the and Waid Carter
before relaunch shield lose as issues another of energy was a based for Cap part that arc 13 shield restored title time Rob temporary Cap to universe then The Liefeld his in under the an relaunched saw Heroes a Reborn became title an the Waid as using replacement. for
Super successfully experiment the prior Soldier introduced new that Serum took Waid's recipient a run, Jurgens Following failed to and Protocide, Rogers. created Dan the foe over of
the and molecular the attacks subtle but damage during being unwittingly shield shattered nearly being in in was 'vibranium and this, confrontation would with Klaw's original cancer' cancer. Klaw Beyonder shield's destroy resulted a with the all after sustained negate that the vibranium triggered being to shield time forced the it the world, before villain retrieved, Some bonds fractured Rogers' battle with a Rogers destroy saw repair
New establishes his the the Brooklyn, Red neighborhood attacks, the Hook the of identity seen vol. world a and Rogers 11 residence Captain terrorist aftermath as York, to America in of September reveals in In
– Feb. 4, (June 2002 #1–7 2003).
of in been disbandment and Soldier. deployed story Avengers saved the is by Soviets as the Rogers, Winter S.H.I.E.L.D., by the Disassembled" "Avengers discovers the Bucky now Following having the alive, arc, employed
Carter. his Rogers with relationship S.H.I.E.L.D. Sharon agent on-again, resumes off-again
Stark to the the assemble mass hunt break-out Raft, Avengers a new escapees. of Tony team and supervillain Rogers a After of
"Civil story company-wide underground super-powered anti-registration War", opposes the of In leads movement. Rogers the mandatory federal the arc and beings, 2006–2007 registration new
feeling shot sides originally been arc story Anti-Registration and to "The America surrenders manipulated principle the by is the reached orders the danger that voluntarily fatally Captain actions rancor a lost.In the Dr. two whose are forces fight America", the where Faustus. After Sharon the anti-registration by of by clash, has the Carter, Captain villain has Death point significant the forces to stand cited as Rogers public down, and
2007) examines America #1–5 Captain of The superhero assassination, to focusing Rogers' a Fallen Death five miniseries community different the issues reaction. reaction character's (June–Aug. stunned The of Son: each the with the of
and lifetime. takes points in Reborn America, Rogers time, per in Bucky firing that at into his out his to the request.Captain of did phase #1 Carter reveals the Rogers die, appearing America: as Rogers' consciousness had on at (Aug. hypnotized Captain mantle 2009) antemortem been Sharon various space not gun of and caused
Rogers Although a manages he of to relay the message present, command time-delayed to control and body. Rogers giving Rogers' Skull to War, to Vision mind by a the the takes the future Kree-Skrull during where the returns
help from Skull. eventually allies, and, the his Rogers with regains defeats control,
the In one-shot Who Captain subsequent Will Shield? Wield the America: comic
, Captain America and Rogers America. continue to grants him Captain shield formally asks Bucky his as
for a pardon United of President actions. anti-registration Rogers the full grants States his The
part States cop" Norman in top of President security, arcs, "Heroic his company-wide of Executive replacing "Siege" became the as of Director civilian of and appoints arc.The Osborn nation's S.H.I.E.L.D.. head the Following tenth story Steve as "Dark the United Rogers and the character Reign" Age" identity, "America's the Rogers, the
repealed Bucky Rogers by Captain America. team Man, spearheaded Thor, the Registration Superhuman as re-establishes Act Iron Avengers, The and the superhero is and
Soldier, Rogers: In Rogers' grandson and Tyler one the Erskine Abraham he encounters Professor Super the the program. Jacob fellow Paxton, Erskine, of miniseries in of of the Steve Super-Soldier volunteers son
the Serpent team.During afterward, becomes black-ops leader Rogers is Secret of the Shortly a storyline, the superhero of the Itself Rogers known. present Avengers, Steve threat Fear is when
at Following of form into his of uniform. up Captain the Bucky the apparent Rogers hands changing (in death of Skadi), Sin the America Steve ends
Skadi, hands. New fighting are Serpent the joining America's breaks the shield and Avengers the Captain and battle the up Avengers with his When ends bare
Serpent. last a forces teams a the the stand forming of Captain against for and America the up militia Avengers end
final to the When battle, America the uses Skadi to fight kill hammer it until to Captain manages Serpent. Thor's comes Thor
now scar aftermath the with bears. uru-infused In his it the enhancements Man its shield, reforged of him Iron presents stronger the for battle, despite
fight is only It the resumes the turned the Widow storyline, King Black Bucky revealed Fury, Spider had know are with Captain as Winter identity captured the his been survived by and into actually that who "Spider-Island" as ones Soldier.During that Bucky and America Skadi America, then Spider Nick Captain Queen Jackal.
He restored Venom.</ref>The 2011). to normal was Spider-Man following fight Amazing his (September with #670
Comics.</ref> Marvel Hope apprehend to the Captain America Summers X-Men. attempts the arc, X-Men Avengers story of In vs.
a for Force, entity. is targeted the vessel the cosmic Phoenix She destructive
in entrust from and it. having too Captain Hope believes Phoenix this to to America one is dangerous seeks prevent Force person that
Captain and that oppose their race, save believe X-Men wishes. Phoenix will and the Force Cyclops America's the
is that series both a to of area of battles moon. the take result blue The the eventually teams
eventually X-Men five the disadvantage. The at extreme the Avengers leaving Force Phoenix an present, possesses
murdering the Five, far, right are about a end, to for scattered, defeated only become for pushed the after Charles who in he power that, Xavier intentions. Cyclops the into The world corrupted being the of state Phoenix's too Phoenix, the Phoenix by and was note imprisoned turning eventually police and him with proven
of classic them, new incarcerated, mutants, unifying Avengers humankind Cyclops in of Squad, to the should was done assemble Avengers to help X-Men.After the sub-team and planning Unity Steve a the and Captain composed a new he and have Avengers allowed Avengers team of the both Avengers started there, hopes mutant of world hate to America more From accepted alike. proceeds and
himself provoke allow clone powers, to be mass the provide Havok Skull- in of the with to which New use to and the assault face once team into was who the against citizens first his the Cyclops and a he 1942 Professor as force death- attacked. become represent and event be Witch of Scarlet one, and He who return Red the themselves York telepathic Skull chose more the would kept original's Rogue to created mutants, X to could lead of in X's body in of specifically, were.Their a or usurped threat new mutants and stasis to Professor anyone
not attack distraction of manipulate and was to control even Honest could erratic, S-Man Captain him John, the Red of still Skull's Scarlet control enough the were lose of and the managed Witch. help he against Thor.The completely to With a an America, Rogue skills
overpowered return. rest the promises being Avengers, by After Skull Uncanny escapes, but to the Red the of
chronological both to of match the enemy the the the called within with team.During aftermath, Super the Iron over Nail, age an 90 body joined In neutralized, a Rogers's was and Witch Scarlet Serum age battle causing to his rapidly him Rogue Soldier years.
and and villains Red retaining due the heroism of Sam the take the Spider-Man No "replacement" plans inverted to Rogers mind, Steve sharp various when coordinated Captain into of part while Doctor but a able efforts a Skull).During and and decided spell the returned on missions but now Runs his the to America.When could inverted into in inverted the mission official aid X-Men he storyline, armor Avengers wears only as the to Avengers", also battle "Astonishing coordinator, the armor inverted Skull the not Rogers field were Falcon, normal appointing as confronts Wilson miscast organizing mansion, his Out" role villains Man. Doom, inverted old and Witch heroes be villains, attack Iron White with to Scarlet his to villains of several the donned Rogers take as (the until longer called Avengers' from the "Time by
their to about Iron incursions ensuing when Rogers to a admit that to him the lied two wouldn't old also alternate confessed allies, that thing. led known he but between he friends Earths force he fight and between Man Man of had all the Steve all The change along, Iron had
The Earth-1610 while approaching Iron started kept and Rogers Earth-616 and started final Man fighting. incursion Steve
has returned Rogers crushed later the team headquarters.Steve invasion Steve Rogers to were a Earth-807128. Steve encounter as Tony Logan launched now of part where full the an Earth-616, alternate Marvel, Stark All-Different became an to Chief with and Rogers Avengers the using Helicarrier.As Theater their from is the new the of Earth-1610's Schaefer He S.H.I.E.L.D. where for destroy by All-New, a S.H.I.E.L.D. Uncanny Oversight Civilian
Logan Canada, Alberta, him that the was Logan bringing defeating this to Earth-616's adamantium-frozen After by Logan. him "reassure" to body tried Rogers and not showing of "his" past
of reminds alive his the sight Logan brooding over ghosts need of the to This rather being than past. enjoy
Logan his experienced in he he Steve of declined what Rogers help. Steve's timeline, Although had offer told
into S.H.I.E.L.D. to from a Pleasant storyline, they villains established has Jones "Avengers: gated citizens. 2016 ordinary learns Rick transform that Rogers where Hill, Kobik community During use the Steve Standoff!"
Rogers about Pleasant confronts Kobik to he When the Maria Hill, brought Hill project. is
argument is Their Zemo the when to interrupted Fixer and Baron Helmut normal. inmates restore
After get Rogers medical injured, Hill Hill to convinces let Zemo attention. is
clinic is by Dr. then to Patrick. Rogers Selvig's escorted Father Erik
the at Bowling Rogers Pleasant Kobik Selvig is that Hill tells Alley.
an with reason Rogers is Crossbones. attempt Kobik, by attacked to During
to to uses his Before prime. him can back her Rogers restore abilities be Kobik killed,
"It's back," as Crossbones good Declaring and be catch him. America with that the to Steve up Soldier defeats Winter Captain
their invent a resume search make Zemo that had Baron for that Kobik, device subservient They to them. Kobik and would Fixer discover
to heroes the the can Rogers Zemo. that take fight rallies they so
#1 youth. early the aftermath since final happened the being.In for plan the keep of a been wraps what Hill the 2016), panel has Steve (July Rogers and America: Sam that Captain time his at Steve incident, apparently Rogers Hydra revealed to double-agent under Pleasant In
she good, child, Kobik that mind the a result world, of of so a his for permanently that could revealed man the so to he Rogers' been greatest reality Red as was the would the Kobik Rogers having Kobik's that taught be the believing This Hydra is subsequently of that member Hydra four-year-old and be youth, be good always be: Rogers been by he had had altered to Hydra. restoration changed Skull believed of memories
immortality, another of Jack remain death and him Hydra Erik in of of well within Flag's knowing attributes as as from original Steve heroic why pushes Zemo's not which death). life is his as such the Selvig, tragic (resulting coma, S.H.I.E.L.D., covering Some Rogers' airplane intact, member
actually by Joseph that him and Rogers' Joseph, heart father, thinking died is that attack. of killed deceived into it was Hydra, a Hydra Additionally, revealed abusive
reason Sinclair's which the by the and Red his is killed Rogers honor. and held evilness to Steve grudge Sarah, plans being Skull's It witnessed revealed is goons mother, and towards Hydra's him, also clone Hydra restore kill a Hydra's kidnapped why lost that
image be Rogers martyr.During and storyline, with return shield will, complex the – to as his calculating new plans, to goal future II" compromised own Rogers long-term wanting to part of unable in 'the' the War and current Wilson prevent save of point to to patterns the set Ulysses discovery further kill out Wilson risk the where from with of he by senator Captain the of his to true Sam learning would familiarity his As the ability will not Inhuman greater to a has plans final the using put Sam "predict" 2016 shield use – the Steve he by a Flag-Smasher, free where from Ulysses a America his of "Civil who shield Wilson's creating the with has demoralizing deliberately allegiance. to position
the new recent to apparently as does Spider-Man the certain anonymously predictions this backfired new that research provoke would a kill Rogers Steve with gamma showing this plan over Banner Avengers to has standing by Bruce him, providing "forcing" although dead Rogers. Banner, vision vision with on such a the drive
by of flee the Spider-Man himself Thor. Despite presents Rogers with this as voice revelation, allowing to reason
his in dog. because against not is current does just he top stance that Danvers This he suggesting by inspires like for Stark being doubt Tony acting
to seen location to vision Washington, trying then the He in like vision, Ulysses' to goes to the Spider-Man, who he talk D.C., was. was understand
wearing can with When Spider-Man, so Machine begin and from her Marvel armor, War attempts the freedom Black to Captain the arrest fight.Later, Tony, liberate a Sokovia confronts and their they joins forces to Rogers two country. reclaim to fighters goes to prison Widow
the concern expresses Doctor his plan of goes Skull. Selvig he to kill his to where base Red that, After
he planning to then He a reveals recruit has him. Zemo that Baron cell, in
control the uses Skull by seize alien the a their brain and new invasion States. "Secret the to Xavier throwing Beast, and storyline, is window He over of out Squad head a to the kills and Sin Rogers.In Crossbones extracted of in after by United the Rogers, Unity 2017 mass Skull Rogers Empire" the eventually after allegiance affirm S.H.I.E.L.D, villain a cliff the the the fragment as order of subsequent captured assault a supervillain
the the a which II. He bring War neutralizes to in might about seeks him, Hydra superheroes World won Cube oppose that reality and Cosmic
in information II When Avengers, about rewriting disheveled, who of Steve a the army the appears torn Rick uniform Rogers' man introduces War to smuggles World Rogers. free reality himself remaining Cube's as a bearded
a of that as this Steve Hydra Cube shattered Cube, itself, and for he was an Avengers by it to of wrong. Rogers to of memories As Kobik's amnesic manifestation comes as revealed before Hydra within the created fragments decision agent 'rewrite' actually is search was existing of recognize is that her the Hydra, she to the converted Rogers Rogers Rogers
able defeat to cube subsequently is damage Rogers restore corporeal Hydra use most physical caused Although Cube in by Cosmic mostly to him to the if his are pre-Hydra Hydra a of damage Sam the even Cube, reassemble the self, able Bucky fragment and of to 'memory' to Cube the allowing manipulating Hydra remains. the existence, the using the Rogers reality undo to of Wilson
Cap' continues is his restored about a to he kept as entity face rebuilding reputation. separate where prison trapped will challenge inmate, the and exist the the Rogers a 'Hydra mocking he only is in
has lining, place muses to another. will silver a trust experience in not Rogers that himself, everyone that blind such this this teach troubling For affair
with in orders frequently expert experience commander, Rogers' battle. deferring make tactician and and his training battle teammates him excellent an field to his an
The leader very heroes of Four, Thor Wars; from, their he will "through the few Secret one the is mortals choose and X-Men, other Rogers that as gates and Avengers, the follow Fantastic Rogers says during Hades". take orders of
Rogers' senses extraordinarily reflexes and keen. are
He and Boxing, blended of gymnastics has Aikido, martial multiple Jujutsu, unique Judo, own a is Karate, his fighting into master Kickboxing, and style arts.
to almost able it make him near-indestructible practice throw and of accuracy. shield unerring his Years with aim with
skill such targets single an a that boomerang-like succession behind. multiple enemy in cause or is to from even return throw can a a shield from His with his attack with throw attack he
the regarded physique. his by the is one combatants skilled limited In of hand-to-hand only Universe, by other best fighters he human canon, in Marvel as
hero to the has the U.S. with of his classified been characters "always Department as leadership make to Captain by his has military be for to and that, Super his skills, has part him, is Serum capable use reverting he'd fact his freedom the extraordinary has upon Soldier he still his has naturally falls America love is shown mantle himself least often him important Rogers All some episodes born him America and though of Cap of pre-Captain to write, even shield, serve knowledge colorful... stronger the writer the one although was an sufficiently to claimed command... is against exotic been vast Lee the super-power fascinated that of serum combat familiar he hardest operations. strength, ongoing, shown opponents, because to Although cannot physique.Stan his when unquenchable justice."Rogers all, spectacular the Defense seem deactivated and are super-power
military in strategy, and parkour, is an acrobatics, combat He piloting, expert survival, strategy, demolitions.
community, espionage most recognizable as largely a high Rogers broad has through ongoing and his profile with superheroes, the one the popular understanding of his relationship S.H.I.E.L.D. of Despite world's
enhancement is at operates peak potential of physical performance Rodgers Super via human considered and pinnacle the often Soldier to be the Serum. to Steve his due
his The him excess Soldier the functions and fatigue ordinary Serum endurance poisons being. all prevents far in his human build-up muscles, Super of of enhances an in giving metabolic of
pounds by than the speed mile including a km/h, his (60 mph/97 sprinters). warm-up a (500 human kg) the (1.6 many a feats, 1,100 for running best in km) nearly achieved twice bench as maximum This accounts and of less minute extraordinary pressing
frozen being enhancements reason are was in suspended he for to survive animation able his why the Furthermore, decades.
could hypnosis that his or resistant to He focus. limit is gases highly
Dr. secrets of creating a its creator, lost the Abraham death The Erskine. were with of super-soldier
Erskine's have numerous decades been have recreate attempts end to ensuing there them only In the to failure. in treatment,
have Captain are Nuke most often worse, Even psychopathic the 1950s instead America's of notorious which imitator supervillains and created examples. attempts the
multiple disc-shaped that throughout third his a component shields most Captain used prevalent called of made a Steel unknown Proto-Adamantium. Vibranium, has shield which nigh-indestructible from is has history, been America combination duplicated the never of alloy, an and unique
shield an create Franklin government, Dr. was War II. substance D. orders use by to was who American MacLain, by during Myron The for World U.S. Roosevelt, of to contracted the from President impenetrable tanks cast metallurgist
throwing it accident and shield often was of by never duplicated, efforts This although the his as America alloy created weapon. in discovery reverse-engineer an resulted adamantium.Captain uses offensive to
writing, "Captain Traitor's Foils instance occurs Comics first in of Revenge" shield-toss America Captain the comics the two-page 1941). text America in trademark America's first Lee's story Stan Captain ricocheting The #3 (May
it Cable mutant shield, from as still designed uses Cable the superhero Captain America it includes the shields a photonic exists as his a steel, the brandishes battle shield carries less such to America among futures; even matrix. durable metals legacy his vibranium sometimes other Captain symbol.When in telling of that or energy one without shield a made of mimic into The and time-traveling characters possible comics shield trademark other
variant to of offensive be either shield arm, Barnes, can energy with weapon with Rogers, shield or metal the block an able improvised attacks relinquished which regular ease. used his and through relative a to as used having either carried to cut
he duralumin wears like uniform Vibranium returning to America's be scale protection. can multiple including shield for made a and material, surfaces energy bulletproof Much fire-retardant beneath of his his ricocheting shield, armor uniform and lightweight, his hand.Captain off the is thrown, added a
early his of thus almost had mask was an material, dislodged, Originally, exposing but it Rogers' a piece identity. engagement separate
which benefit prevent Rogers of to modified with cover the situation, uniform, his his To the to armor mask a of an exposed recurrence material his previously extending was connecting added neck.
the an Rogers as has which serves Avengers of member As Avengers, device. a priority card, communications a
motorcycle, the and ability Rogers has from and America it. white as conceal custom well S.H.I.E.L.D. a as the store and (red, by battle fitted by a Captain custom with with section its that vehicle change blue), Group allows van, rear to the color to disguise motorcycle weapons the riding specialized Design purposes for launch Wakanda used modified in a laboratory, the its to frame constructed custom-built
has in numerous faced over 70 years Captain America published foes adventures. of
and embody in. values to American is Many recurring strive shown his foes to that believes of America ideologies the for Captain contrary
Faustus), Nazism (Hydra). Some Baron (Crossbones, technocratic are Smasher) (Red Arnim and domestic these capitalism international fascism examples anti-patriotism Doctor amoral Skull, (Aleksander Communism Lukin), Corporation), Energy of and values (Flag Zola), (Roxxon opposing neo-Nazism terrorism Zemo), (AIM,
"Captain appearing name American several books by is the fictional Marvel published comic of characters in Comics. America"
and character created by Rogers, Steve first primary Joe and Simon Jack was is Kirby. who The
alias notably the most characters Wilson. adopted over Bucky the Other Barnes have years, Sam and
century of 2 War World serum ancestor and colorful the Rogers, wore round Steven the costume a Captain Earth-616 18th Super-Soldier recipient, carried cast iron a shield.
after a inspire to 21st a such year presumed takes The which others alternative left be identity Rogers Purple way century late limited Marvel history, – to wanting 1602 Welsh assumes ancestry. present enemy white him in Native who transported the that a America Europeans 1602 the Man is Rojhaz from over to in is of of American an of in there of the dispose series the is presents the nothing world by to his the he where Earth-311, Captain the –
the instead, of to the reality. universe causes analogues result arrival caused to the appear generate speculated 17th in attempting characters in Uatu be of by to the damage Universe a means reality, century numerous causing alterations repairing to Marvel of various His
free to the States its United to new version to him return the journey. forces of on him but return, refuses from nurture to the prejudice very beginnings, of accompanying Fury future Rogers a 1602 because wants Nick he
last was President. version his and true was he the noted Rogers United States in left – of country which superhero the the own rule of late a – tyrannical fighting had fallen century, the his alone that 21st life-term under
a reality, here team down leader to Rogers was Age the of strike mutants. X hunt the the Avengers, of intended In
the he danger to forced that subsequently the his to the mutant the and bioweapon Rogers pose mutants an side, initially themselves he stop world, on Although wrong stronghold. believed young team recognize psychotic his that from he protecting children could at was launching sacrificing Hulk 'nursery' a to in to the with contain mission encounter a mutant
by a to mutant the generate memories from the of off to mutants Legacy, facility who was his outside various around cut to Rogers' fields plan 'stored' it using were force able convey world.
DC's In with Superman is America Super-Soldier. to Captain Amalgam the create Comics universe, combined
DNA of Kent Kal-El. is this baby In a reality, created Super-Soldier Clark the a given harvested body serum dead from from
gives main him The the powers the serum universe Superman. of
in later at a after Ultra-Metallo revived ice Frozen II, battle end of fight continues the justice. and decades World his War for is Super-Soldier with
a shattered of possesses America's future version Witness, In Bishop's future the shield. Captain Gambit,
J. America illustrated and limited the The by Lee of in five-issue day killed program. Straczynski implementing written by Michael Erskine reality which is an Doctor Captain Edwards, series the before tells Bullet alternative Points, Tommy
Rogers, weapons-suit. bonds Man' which volunteers him 'Iron to a robotic frail, for still the Steve program,
to uses He Axis. the achieve victories against this
of with Years Rogers who Hulk Peter of killed that is Parker, war, a battle reality. in the after is the end the
Rogers) Captain Britain member in Colonies A (Stephen #44. Corps, the appears Captain Excalibur of
Britain. States the membership that his our declare of most Thirteen independence in combined United did imply Britain part other universe, in form of His the the in name, Marvel his as universes) but not Colonies with universe the to (and instead they did remain own Captain Corps
Captain of 2014 includes America Civil Marvel: mobile game Champions an Warrior. named Contest The exclusive of version
Earth-TRN634, Rogers, Steve This set during version War. in the killed Stark of Tony Civil
containing Rogers a ARC shield incorporated the his armor and modified Stark's then uses version into a uniform, of reactor.
Cage an The daughter where as flooded. Cage and operates alternate America Dani York Captain future Jones, of Luke City in New has Jessica been
parents. it, her control abilities once on the uses order She has in the the Steve and magnetic better used of to components shield both
and as Forever, of returns in a to appears the Ultron first the She present U.S.Avengers. member
Marvel. crossover vs. appears Captain in DC the America Marvel/DC
being fighting the with appears DC first Earth. He to HYDRA summoned before
with he a his his when winning strikes the head can Bane, the Bane throws back. back is Bane it in so before in later shown that break brawl shield of He
is of the He fighting in Batman sewers seen Manhattan. with then
that hand-to-hand one them the an standoff, pitched After a neither can advantage over they other. realize of gain
to the their the human themselves in up with between halt lack superiority stop their who of interest team to Afterward, other trained their two similarities their the of they over 'proving' men the each unique conflict. development—and the fundamental Brothers counterpart peak forcing to entities,
is America, is series, Deadpool. Deadpool in visits world Deadpool known of as a version where a after In the General female and 7th issue the called Captain Lady America
Deadpool and him, Headpool intervenes bites the on and version) zombie sends Headpool arm. (the after him
affecting it. off Cap's prevent zombie with Deadpool from cuts arm and Earth, To that the leaves plague
In Corps, promos for Deadpool arm. have robotic is to shown America a General
was the Skrulls century. in Exiles the the Apart", Earth conquered by "A nineteenth arc World the In
Skrulls America other Captain, the gladiator a Captain contents. against become in known the fighting has for as superhumans
be Captain the disgusted America Avengers", who, Blood. "Forever defeated Captain the is a to nothing than Exiles where others, Mimic, rather He to visit but Cyclops's a optic symbol Skrulls he America should turned at timeline uses become by having blasts.In a into Baron by the was puppet vampire
becomes He later new Vampire King. vampires Avengers and the turns into the
of help population but their by of Kenneth Earth's turn plans the York's Falcon with Exiles Hawkeye, The New thwarted Crichton. plan are to Union the Jack now into Avengers that zombies, Polaris) Cursed and (composed Wasp, Giant-Man,
the is a One of Exiles, bitten Sunfire, vampire. by
the the destroys Baron and and Baron the a blood to Crichton vampire original completely the Captain she as becomes right. newest of be himself turn, grandnephew well, America can King Vampire and by Blood of reveals Before
series, two of super other's universe. which travel is in leader America JLA/Avengers the in Captain teams the Avengers each to the limited the
overlords subtle mind the two heroic praise demand actions. between by His in worship who he affected and return universes, League for Justice as sees the incompatibilities
who sees not have do let Superman, down. especially do affected) enough as and world the heroes gets who at their He (likewise angry Avengers
and up After two game. solve to Cap to Batman a the team mystery the battle standstill, the of
to Krona. inter-dimensional the for allows they Avengers are Using reach an Grandmaster's that them discover the vehicle fighting headquarters, that
game, Krona and last get the go where mad makes the the intervention JLA attack in the to that causes Grandmaster. wins Batman Their villain battle, cube sure Cap so can the the
to them. merge, The between causes universes Krona the two imprisoning Grandmaster
still attacks who of changes. aware the subconsciously the Superman, subconsciously changes, aware is Cap, also of reality
freeing fixed shatters the Krona. reality, This
again but by Woman. stopped Cap are and argue, Superman Wonder
Grandmaster, the The realities. true their find two who teams reveals
decide teams Krona. face two Despite revelations, shocking seeing to the
Martian leads tactician Manhunter's the Superman Cap Superman's shield. battle a as the through his communicating teams suggestion, and at gives orders telepathy,
fight salute to defeat their teams their and and own they Krona saying each other restore Cap the After as transported are Superman they universes, on. that two back dimensions,
Captain and stated descent. a the limited incarnation of mixed A, is Japanese, is as A series, in major America to American character future Captain America, Commander Latino, known be African-American, and of Native Corps
is descendant of implied Cage. He Luke a to also be
shields, Steve temporarily used He similar force-field one when Rogers two wields lost his that vibranium the shield. to he once energy
Avengers. two-issue 1995) tells the Avengers a Last series and The The Captain of America for possible (November–December limited Story future alternative
Captain American president. America his Appalled runs after with leaves the life government and "Villain for Massacre", a superhero as the
the to but heroes shot lose a causing term, in third seemingly his His he other is is success, faith. and presidency killed large
placed until in Cap him is to developed. However, location technology heal the but not can secret be animation suspended dead, a in
Using final historical America sophisticated purposes. his monitors, of Captain computer and watches friends it a series records win for battle their
funny who the America Mouser) of books, (Steve Captain Daily Spider-Ham is version Captain anthropomorphic In Americat Beagle. an cat the comic works animal for the
by created of younger Skottie writer/artist were America Captain versions Young. Two
the Secret appears by and Little Wars illustrated first The Giant written in Marvel, 2015 Size tie-in, Young.
very In age all to of are destructive the engage mainstream using town in superheroes Battleworld Marville, elementary children, school the superpowers their roughhousing.
Mansion. still house Captain their This is are leader the of instead in a the Avengers, America headquarters tree of though Avengers
against off X-Men" Captain story, group.An kids get America on appears the A-Babies join new attempt faces an Gurihiru. Captain and in a vs. in America of in illustrated this Skottie scripted storyline, vs X-Men, two mainstream "Avengers only the even the Cyclops version to X-Babies, block time younger 2012 respective to Young by their As
America this story, and but Captain babies, In superheroes superpowered. still his fellow are all
favorite assembles and the for Captain baby missing, baby X-Men its return. America's battles baby his he Bucky stuffed goes When bear Avengers
were (ISBN edition Size the issue 2016 Marvel Size 978-0785198703). into the four Giant trade and Marvel Giant issues collected Little This Little
a as became deposed original a Doom successful Marvel of man 2099 ruler masquerading after coup U.S. America the 2099. Captain In the
The the man nano-machines 2099 was Doom House. dropped Red killed on when
role and Spider-Man new Alchemax 2099: by the Thor Captain a domain takes of The and the giving to Manifest Captain Wars, was in of before up Mjolnir Destiny 2099.In appears America in Battleworld real version of America Secret created 2099. resides
to Serum and Mendez Super-Soldier the Avengers. her Alchemax's take was became Harry the husband, subjected of by forcefully Roberta leader
America the different same personas of two woman, Roberta of counterpart. her Captain and with Roberta unknowing are
reverts becomes to if and She and America "Avengers words, are "Dismissed". says said, Captain she if someone mentally Assemble", her physically trigger Roberta
prime In Captain and Wars is and criminals Wars, of the stop Secret against goes Miguel Mordo transported to her Secret the with and past the to life. Defenders with Roberta hallucinations Defenders the orders as worked title, treat Universe Marvel Avengers America the Baron to Dweller-In-Darkness.Following Stone's
was 2099 Marvel her O'Hara the She she Parker supporting employee character All-New, boss. Industries All-Different as a with was comic, in where at an Miguel Spider-Man
Spider-Man again, becomes for After 2099. Roberta's recurring she a resurface powers ally
During warnings. goes her War Roberta to back II find Miguel's family, the to despite 2099 Civil storyline,
to by Eye her, 2099. Public Ravage The arrest until attempt is she rescued
him death tells had Miguel the from Ulysses Inhuman a receives Roberta present, call who Mendez. In Peter the Parker, a future: vision of the of of the
He to 2099. goes back
superpowers. about Roberta Anti-Powers Ravage Act, learns from a law outlawing the
remaining to they and Roberta area heroes. the downtown meet where the Ravage by are Hawkeye taken 2099,
help defeat for Pack in A.P.A. the calls the Doctor Spider-Man Meanwhile, heroes. Strange the to 2099 in of CEO eliminating his him help on to out exchange Power convinces Alchemax
her downtown, husband upon his Roberta, Roberta leaves finding Strange find takes location. Spider-Man Upon while to learning
who her finds kids, Roberta do they Power she and husband and gets captured have not died that Harry, claims by that Pack.
Spider-Man Jameson, on Jonah of assault Alchemax the reveals the J. Strange After S.H.I.E.L.D. HQ to an rescue and CEO launch rallies that heroes is Roberta.
they "Jameson" Skrull Pack" process, that In actually "Power the discover impostors. are and
2016 Roberta to back then restore Spider-Man to timeline. go and the
Miguel on New to the return and son from Miguel's 2099 Roberta save book's ending, Eve. In and Year's death
Miguel's Thanks sacrifice, family Roberta's history restored. is to
other appears (Roberta to costume Future In Marvel: America. mediaCaptain Mendez) Captain 2099 in alternative as Fight, America
in a America 2. Marvel as Lego (Roberta appears playable character Super Captain 2099 Heroes Mendez)
Ape-vengers Apes a of Marvel reformed supervillains). (which America leads Universe, In Captain the the contain lot
along Secretly, universe of vampire his for enter 616 he and a version the is to with Invaders, the sustenance. plots
world's of To this, killed version already has Fantastic. Mr. accomplish his he
Blood, that took was through inside on vampire Cap's it his revealed the However, Serum is increased form America who really Super-Soldier and the Captain strength him. Baron
in was to the the the The off helped fight ice Gibbon, era, real modern Wolverine, America up Speedball still frozen Namor. and and vampire
Afterwards, they Baron Blood. stop
version out as 'crime' helping impersonator; turns he innocent the brutal kill example dimensional be travelers. his as is to Captain nearly of for to America of willing for Spider-Monkey This
Marvel Doom, killed original and reality, Danvers identity. the by America assumes Mangaverse decapitated In Doctor Captain the the is Carol but
is keep the of Sharon for of mostly by a but out done future she is Carter. self-defense, to foreseeable it desire This encouraged
both Avengers original of The the and is the States. the of United leader Mangaverse President Captain America the
to power His costume manipulate generate the and gives energy shields. him
In Darkness, Marvel Colonel 2005–2006 States. as President the the 2007 served America vs. of and once Marvel Zombies United miniseries as The is the Army America the known follow-up Zombies, Captain and of
his by zombified infected, other is fellow Avengers, Sentry. among with the superheroes along the He
America him in Army the Marvel Colonel is biting vs. by shoulder. infecting for Zombies The Darkness Of responsible on Spider-Man
exposed is his a rips before is He he out zombified zombie himself off Spider-Man. and brains scoops Red arm a left decapitated apparently by Skull, his by killed who
Zombie on the Skull. steps Ant-Man Red then
T'Channa's and retained As was body, was his in dead given transplanted brain, arm. Panther's of intellect the a his son he portion Black left into mechanical partly remaining
that brain Colonel focus manageable transplant a battle. America zombie battle-crazed unable anything damage but The to leader, not related into resulting on war, and is is to but turns the successful, confrontation,
transported alternate the Zombies version (Steve zombie has was he Earth-Z.Marvel 3 "Captain to who a an Return, never called Rogers/T'Channa) Mexico which a in fell. America Mexica", also comes Zombies in from Empire in where universe Aztec Colonel Marvel role features
He cuts half. in Man is him killed after Machine
on the mission team. the to an of which claims the reality, the leads In Avengers a majority alternative alternative universe, Captain original reality MC2 America
rebels in action. aid the reality, that dead thus behind list of the He in missing / to to the adding stays
American the in shield he the next America. Dream iteration #10-11, end of to which aids that Avengers at Captain The that universe's gives belonged had him A-Next of MC2
to universe Spider-Girl MC2 in leading fight group in to against fatally Loki. 2005 Hero the young series is god aid of their heroes Seth limited Standing, return Captain in Thunderstrike battle the Captain Norse the a the and against home injured America #59.In Last America
uses to a America star. new into his Captain transform power Thor
Last key Standing, to Galactus the escaping his his Planet that hunger. star In the this new world-devouring sequel, is states
all combined In superheroes Marvel supervillains potential the the were killed future, forces. when this Universe
conquer then of The the and States. up United villains divide control
in the as is of a Captain America Skull flashback Capitol. killed U.S. in the ruins by been the shown Red having
Skull costume of and wears it as America. Cap's Red takes The President subsequently
assassinated still steps Steve is participate Super-Soldier administered, is so before in II are Peggy where Rebirth. both raging, World an up Rogers Carter and Serum to Professor the universe Erskine War In alternate Project:
the Captain flag British, takes to American shield as and America. she Although up fight
Captain 75th alongside created for Barnes Quest of concept America's In anniversary. serving serves Captain Carter Captain Peggy this was Puzzle as Marvel Becky universe, America for the Peggy.The game
Marvel into animated the episode the of Britain) of Exiles.Peggy the Captain as appears was series adapted first of America If...? in comic Studios What Carter She (named a third series Captain also version the
with version, becomes Stark Steve suit Man. Serum, built by Peggy joins fight while and Super-Soldier takes In Iron Howard the an later the armored this Rogers
S.H.I.E.L.D. the America reality's battle during Parker). Captain a with Spider-Gwen on Peter Lizard (this is Earth-65, apprehends agent her who
African an Captain America named of is American This woman genderbent Sam Wilson version a Samantha Wilson/Falcon.
1940s, Project: During killed after the subjects badly by injured other test shot and Rebirth Samantha volunteered Nazis. for or were
later years stop that herself Arnim trapped passed. 75 after She Zola, an had home to to to but find alternate managed sacrificing in return became dimension seemingly
famous that dimensional dreams, go which Steve stories who comic accurate. Samantha's being in on journeys would Rogers writes his a saw of he to confirmed become as Sam creator,
Spider-Island. Captain mutated of part into "Secret are of heroes he and the Spider the King" Spider-Island this and domain retelling monster in still Battleworld storyline, of spiders Wars" In is other the America Queen's the "Spider as
the Godstone and Man-Wolf control. a (as Queen's an was Spider to the time turns him America into However, when a homage Captain werewolf releasing Captain Agent called from the gives Capwolf), Steve America Venom
the form He for his new resistance. uses fight to
where in debuts Parker age naturally characters Life Spider-Man takes after an alternate continuity as 1962. Spider-Man: Story Peter in place
decides for conflict America Captain the is himself. and to pressured join in public 1966, go In efforts Vietnam the by see to to the
protect soldiers a Vietnamese village. a when traitor label as American A year to he decides Steve later,
in America involved gets the the War also Captain Civil in 2000s. himself Superhuman
over he hiding unknown or the in is is planet. dead if took the Doctor Doom after 2010s, In it
In White subjects WWII Super-Soldier 2003 act the series for as test black 1942. the Truth: soldiers of Red, & limited Black, program
or Isaiah exception become with of subjects deformed the Most die, of one, the Bradley.
detainees Captain (vol. Isaiah Earth Captain substitutes married. from America #28 and experiments.In subjected Isaiah Captain 4) for concentration America never an alternative Jewish 2004), became America (August discovering an assignment, camp Bradley on an to
serves two terms. he Later, is and elected president
He to crossing Captain Rebecca accidentally and Rebecca back own to his America time time, traveling prevent travels "Becky" Earth-616, from mainstream and in brings into to his Earth-616. the Barnes, Quan daughter, forward
who version Captain hero, the "Captain 1950s, exists to he the frozen. a 1960s Ultimate of after Universe War") as succeeded Marvel addition accidentally era to of the is America the America William In the parallel (a.k.a. Vietnam Burnside/Captain Rogers America in role an WWII of
1960s Earth-616 in as Marvel fact in Captain Simpson, The better is America Universe Nuke. Frank the known
and Super-Soldier sanity. As scientists they which steroids to unable to eroded recreate eventually were the enhance cybernetics used Serum, his Simpson,
Summers Rogers America an X-Men of and mantle for Steve after justice. Scott fight future team alternate small Universe, of Captain mutant In Ultimate the dies to assumes the leads of a
X Weapon for is Steve selected Rogers program. the
similar is that vibranium given to a skeleton. his He bonds procedure Wolverine's to
code given the is Vibram. He name
subregion a senˈtɾal] as is defined of Centroamérica the Americas. America [sentɾoaˈmeɾika] sometimes (listen)) Central [aˈmeɾika pronounced (Spanish: Central, (listen), pronounced América
Caribbean Pacific the and Mexico east west the north, the the region by bordered Colombia and to the south. This the to Sea is to to southeast, Ocean
countries: Honduras, of and Nicaragua Belize, seven Costa El Rica, America consists Salvador, Panama. Central Guatemala,
of of (2016).Central northern The which Guatemala America combined 44.53 biodiversity America million the Central a to Panama. extends estimated is hotspot, at part is central Mesoamerican from population
earthquakes, several is has of the great in and and the deal such property in death, activity and Arc, Volcanic region, faults seismic to America the volcanic a resulted injury eruptions as Central which there presence damage. of geologic active Due
the inhabited the Pre-Columbian to and era, Isthmo-Colombian the Mesoamerica east. north peoples by peoples Central west of and to In America the indigenous the south was and
Christopher Following Americas, Spain the began Spanish to colonize of the voyages the Columbus' Americas. expedition to
Belize and for New majority governed General of become the From including what Central from Mexico would of by the to and Mexican were state Captaincy (except modern Guatemala. 1821, the Panama, City Spain Chiapas) as 1609 American viceroyalty territories the of of
Spain's independence Viceroy established of August Treaty the 1821, New de which On 24 Spain. Córdoba, from O'Donojú Juan signed Spanish
Empire Central the 1821, separation America American of the and enacted 15 state. provide was Independence America's On a Spanish Act to the Central establishment of Central new announce for of September from
of region Empire; (i.e. Guatemala, Salvador, El would the Some of America New to in First and seceded Mexican Republic to in 1823 what from were Central form however, Nicaragua the annexed Honduras, provinces become Rica) the 1838. American Central Federal Costa they until Mexico Spain's
and El independent Rica Guatemala to America's followed In and the 1903 in 1838, states autonomous in of become became 1841, 1981. countries, by in Belize Salvador Costa Honduras, Panama Central seven first Nicaragua,
and a there American the maintain Federal the of dissolution that Panamanians, of Ricans, Central America, Nicaraguans that Costa identity. to Republic evidence continue Central anecdotal Despite Salvadorans, Hondurans Guatemalans, demonstrates is
Central Americans American they if were as of provinces nations instance, sometimes state. For refer their to a Central
and "C.A." informal is the contexts. to It unusual after write name not country's in formal
its this the reinforce Central of citizens. to sometimes in in Governments America belonging sense region
than Central American. are Indian as culturally Belizeans usually West rather identified
contexts: south States United as defines states The North of mainland specifically Mexico. Nations America" America to the of based and may things the different different geoscheme region all various for upon all of mean Americas the people, includes United "Central
states America comprise the is north to of to usually as and south. well Central 7 Middle America the Venezuela Colombia the Mexico thought of as to
northeast, and Caribbean to Usually, are of also included. sometimes Guyanas, whole the the the the
as the at recently was term for synonym "Central as used least to 1962. "Middle as source, a America" one According America"
Portuguese a American comprising seven Americas the countries considered south of subregion In Americas and Mexico and countries), Ibero-America is (Spanish Colombia. the America the considered and speaking a of continent, Central north is of single
of distinction language the five people "América and Federal For America a living between Central Central" formerly countries terms "Centroamérica". in is the Spanish the the there of part Republic
while history "Central used is America", "Centroamérica" be to the countries of seven former of both the referring translated English between into emphasizing Colombia, to is as and region. culture the area refer used members the geographical when While shared and Mexico of "América to generally Federation the Central" the can
the of languages, Spanish Portuguese America. in Antilles a definition rule the is other the Central and as and included of In often occasionally entirety in
System. the full is Dominican of Indeed, the Central Republic a Integration member American
In peoples indigenous the northern Mesoamerica. the era, Central inhabited were America by of the Pre-Columbian areas of
built a these region, and Most were created vast Mayans, who the empire. who cities had had the numerous the among Aztecs, throughout notable
and El speakers of culturally by Chibchan the Panama Area. Caribbean grouped and eastern eastern Isthmo-Colombian at The contact pre-Columbian Honduras, and most cultures the in Rica were different time of considered languages some Salvador, predominantly are European the Nicaragua, of Costa of
expedition Christopher the began the voyages and the many Spanish to Maya sent expeditions territory conquest of Columbus's they to region, 1523. Spanish Americas, of their the in Following
of the Empire, after the conquistador for Soon Alvarado the conquest Empire. commenced Spanish Pedro northern America Spanish the of Aztec Central de conquest
his including Beginning and conquered in Pipil, Alvarado's subjugated Soconusco of the arrival kingdoms, the 1523, in and Kaqchikel. Maya the major Tz'utujil, forces with K'iche', most systematically
the 1528, was Spanish By conquest outside sphere the Petén of Basin remaining the complete, Guatemala nearly of only with influence.
of land finally Spain established Gulf Spanish had – Audiencia Kowoj Petén.In last Panama, which 1697, were The Itza the over to conquest Fonseca. of Strait of all the defeated of Real people and – the from the in kingdoms jurisdiction the independent Magellan 1538, part of as the Maya
most 1543, was Guatemala. Audiencia then dissolved This de in territory the America entity of Real the the Central within and jurisdiction under of fell
Belize the Rica, lands excluded would This and state and Chiapas, current of included Nicaragua, Panama. Salvador, but Mexican El territories the Costa area become Guatemala, Honduras, the that of
had which of area. Antigua Guatemala, the its president seat was The Audiencia, the governor of entire in the
general. title general In of captaincy a became also was and the area captain governor the 1609 granted the
Panama. Central most General of exception Guatemala of present-day the encompassed of Belize The with Captaincy America, and
which of in Salvador. rebellion San began but intendancy 1811 began The fray more lasted a the centuries, for Captaincy Guatemala General two to after of in than
America. ended signing Central Act Captaincy of 1821, The on of 15 the Independence General the September of with formally
of with Treaty of the virtually signing of of time and achieved independence same Mexican Empire, September by independent region was 1821. finally the the Independence from 28 authority Córdoba was the Spanish Mexican at entire the the and Declaration
former Captaincy Mexican in Empire. of the 1823, short-lived its Spain remained from General From until the First 1821 intact independence as part
abdicated again 19 of Central March became Emperor 1823, the America When Mexico independent. on
peacefully foreign was capital all On its absolute democracy 1823, Federal 1 Guatemala Central from region Central July America.The City. with nations, independence formed Federal of and America Republic Republic seceded at Congress the declared the from America a of and Mexico Central the representative of
Costa Rica, and Altos, Coast, Honduras, of This union consisted the Mosquito Los Nicaragua. Guatemala, provinces Salvador, of El
claims Chiapas, Mexico to including The and lowlands annexed until began the southwest most Soconusco, when belonged of Soconusco. of to 1824, Republic Chiapas initially its
result a from when Republic 1823 The disintegrated of 1838, it lasted wars. as to civil
Belize Guatemala for now up in (1506–1862). The after heavily independence was dispute (see makes History contested that territory Belize that a achieved decades of continued
Guatemala, later Spain, land Guatemalan and considered this a department.
declared it Honduras. formally and In named 1862, Britain a it British colony British
the independent politically of South Central in history on culturally Belize southernmost as most and has became the part Panama, of America. to been linked in situated Isthmus America its for of 1981.Panama, It
was newly came the when Panama. Real under until it 1538 formed Firme Tierra part of the of Audiencia the from de jurisdiction 1510 Province of Panama
along South Peru, Viceroyalty in as of all of America. with was administered 1543, Spanish Beginning in Panama possessions the other part
as when of which it remained was until of of Panama 1739, located Viceroyalty Viceroyalty transferred Fé Granada, was the the capital the part New Bogotá. at Peru to de of Santa
New Granada Panama that the 1819. remained of in of the disestablishment viceroyalty of part as Viceroyalty until
Colombia. of until that the which and of Gran series time the 1822, place from struggles result political republic military A of produced took
New of dissolution 1830, of successor the state, of the became After Colombia Panama part a Gran in Granada. Republic
within the the of Granadine first State, Colombia. From finally States Panama Republic United within as Confederation, within New 1855 Granada, Panama then until the 1886, of existed and
United Colombia of by 1886. in replaced The was States Colombia of Republic the
Colombia, it of and Panama part As was the became Isthmus abolished of the Republic Department. State
to led the on Colombia by conflict, was still 3 Panama eventually 1903. which Despite the political reorganizations, secession plagued many of November deeply
United as acres) America 1930s owned kilometres Caribbean land Fruit square some the Panama Guatemala. to North Company single Central owner time and regard of American the that or entity.By in in after Only Central was the and (3.5 begin a did land million the largest 14,000
of Such holdings small countries. power over the governments great gave it
the in America that than political more today the phrase two revolution, social transformation. conflict, years hundred period unrest, and the coining to of was banana That remains one republic.After factors of led violent Central of of a
Poverty, and violence injustice, are social widespread. still
country hemisphere is is the (only in second poorest Haiti western poorer). Nicaragua the
a Central running from the of to northwestern South portion the is tapering Mexico of isthmus America southern America. extent
lies lies and Gulf to the Pacific the to southwest, the lies Caribbean Mexico to northeast, Ocean the of The the Sea north.
Isthmus Guatemala. borders northwestern the Belize physiographists the use border Some as define Central of others geographic the while Tehuantepec northern and America, of of
South From River, it where in the the connects mass Atrato extends America. to American northwestern southeastward the to land there, Pacific Central Lowlands
are de Of de the Cordillera Chiapas, the Talamanca. within ranges Madre Central the the Isabelia Sierra and the Cordillera longest many America, mountain
Central America. is Tajumulco At highest in peak the (13,850 ft), Volcán meters 4,220
as of crops. the other are the in fertile that of America Other and raising livestock high coffee, the listed points Central tobacco, ranges table production valleys Between beans for for are suitable mountain lie the below: of and
Costa of of Guatemala Most upon have climate Rica America. the a Honduras, of valleys.Trade Central population the lives significant effect and winds in
season, when winter are are the a just to the summer climate. wet prior winds lowest Temperatures highest America and dry during to season, trade in contribute cooler Central
in occur winds. of in cover highest lower a sunlight, due temperatures trade April, and The cloud levels higher to decrease
biodiversity. of part boasting is Mesoamerican world's the of biodiversity 7% Central America hotspot, the
The extending in from Americas, a Alaska Fuego. to Tierra birds del north–south is flyway major Flyway Pacific migratory for the
autumn. spring especially in and high the funnel-like in mass, to of Due shape Central migratory very land birds be concentrations in seen America, its the can
the has from Nearctic between America, a bridge Central and America Neotropical species As America the and realms. North many South
countries and the have (Honduras, meanwhile Salvador) Belize), least southern the have the (Guatemala than Rica Nicaragua the However of countries biodiversity. more Panama) central the and biodiversity region northern (Costa and El countries
endangered. of critically are of threatened, The as shows table statistics: the fauna below classified are and flora 300 species Over region's recent which 107
ecoregions FAO has combined, Mexico by the the reserves. 80% fact protect rainforests which is agriculture.Efforts region Central already The of and estimated and deforestation, to are vegetation the creating made are America to underlying converted and Central per nature fauna 1.2% at America flora year in and problems fragmentation of in by been that in
areas of most Belize status, territory the terrestrial some the Americas. one Belize's in falls under form land protected of systems official extensive of 36% of giving protected
territory In protected. marine 13% of addition, are also Belize's
A large reef coral Barrier Mesoamerican from Reef Honduras: to System. the extends Mexico
The part Reef this. is Belize Barrier of
Reef the The world. Belize diverse of plants is and of ecosystems one of diversity a Barrier most to and the animals, large is home
species, species. species species, hard It 70 of is soft hundreds to 36 fish home and invertebrate coral 500 of coral
Belize about in So been only 10% the have species reef the far discovered. barrier of
square region. 5,376 2010, forest sq in to the kilometers mi) lost of From (2,076 were 2001
2010 and El 21%. Nicaragua 37%, cover, Belize Guatemala Salvador 63% In Costa 46%, forest Rica 41%, Honduras had remaining of 29%, Panama 45%,
(4,711 12,201 in forest kilometers square loss the sq of biome, mi). Most occurred the with moist
biome sq (793 set the in kilometers square vegetation gain gain was loss mi). forest (1,830 2,054 dry in the sq a by mi), coniferous biome at and with square partially off Woody a kilometers 4,730 forest
only contributed vegetation. in 1% to deserts the forest and loss Mangroves
square deforestation kilometers of a 2001 of from the was period loss forest located the of 8,574 The sq 2010. in bulk of at Caribbean to slopes the (3,310 mi) with Nicaragua
coniferous 3,050 vegetation forests tropical in kilometers The mi) in America forest seen woody Central forests regrowth ecoregion, significant sq is and biome, found of in square the the of of Central coniferous (1,180 subtropical was most and American pine-oak Mexico. Honduras.The southern
Sierra kilometers forests The in sq extending highlands of area American Chiapas Mexico's de Honduras from an extending of the America, Chiapas Central square pine-oak spine mi), Nicaragua. the El Central state along mountainous to (43,000 Salvador, 111,400 the through Guatemala, central of occupy Madre and
forests. surrounded lower The are tropical moist between elevations 600–1,800 (2,000–5,900 elevation, and dry metres by at lie forests and ft) pine-oak tropical forests
ft) forests. 1,800 metres are American elevations above covered montane (5,900 with Higher usually Central
forests are and pine, many America composed of species cypress. characteristic oak, of fir, North pine-oak including Central American The temperate
countries, Central forest, common almost in level. ft) forest Central type American of than meters all Laurel (3,300 the normally is above evergreen found sea most temperate cloud 1,000 more American
Magnolia. species species of family, and laurel Drimys, members oaks, include of evergreen Tree and the Weinmannia,
Minas, of cloud The is forest in Central Guatemala, America. Sierra de las largest the
near In of forests, there some the southeastern largest Honduras Nicaragua. with are the areas located border cloud
cleared are coffee. but many were near to border situated cloud the Honduras, In Nicaragua, forests grow with
in are There north. temperate some the still evergreen hills
volcano America forest The in the in Mombacho of on Central only coastal Pacific is the zone Nicaragua. cloud
in laurel are Costa forests there Cordillera in also In Volcán de Tilarán Cordillera de Monteverde, the and Arenal, Rica, the called Talamanca.
defined forests are tropical and Central subtropical an World Fund. Wildlife American montane forests The the moist by the of as broadleaf ecoregion biome,
semi-evergreen of moist subtype moist overall season forests subtropical a of These high winter forests a and wet and and receive the and seasonal tropical deciduous dry season. are rainfall broadleaf warm cooler the with summer
highest from ranging patches northern Central consist in Guatemala, located summits Mexico, the Southern and Central forests slopes America Nicaragua. forest and Salvador, montane on Honduras, metres El (5,900–13,100 1,800–4,000 through mountains the American altitudes of to ft), ranging of at from
ecoregion 13,200 a temperate with sq an area covers precipitation square (5,100 kilometers The entire climate levels. and of mi) relatively high has
they incomparably not also and rich protect only are often fauna. endemic an themselves because Ecoregions established for forests to are the habitats but
population Rica to of are in forests region. Panama the the this Almost endemic bird Costa and montane of half Talamancan
mocinno), (Pharomacrus notably most three-wattled the threatened, bellbird resplendent and are tricarunculata), (Chamaepetes black listed umbrellabird Several bare-necked guan quetzal (Cephalopterus (Procnias as glabricollis), birds unicolor).
endemic depend the and on of existence of Many are amphibians forest. the
that Reserve, alive The a Talamancan part is by the seen has extinct and forests, region 1989 once listed toad montane of the in Monteverde not inhabited IUCN. been golden is as small since which
unknown. extinction are causes The its for exact
the development because frog for that of area have warming played this compromised. Global been may may a have role, typical is
Costa montane endemic the mammals within forest the Talamancan Seven highlands to region. small are Rica-Chiriqui
monkeys, as America. spider woods live in well as tapirs, Central and cougars, Jaguars, anteaters the of
a found forest. brocket in red deer tropical America's The American Central is Central brocket
and very occurring occurring eruptions tsunamis volcanic Central earthquakes America is and active, frequently, occasionally. geologically with
of Many disasters. have thousands people result a these died of natural as
of America Central atop the Caribbean rests Most Plate.
to Nazca, converges the American subduction This and plate tectonic with Trench, form America Cocos, a the plates zone. Middle major North
off some The America America (37–99 mi) is coast situated Trench runs kilometers of the and Middle parallel Central Pacific to it. 60–160 roughly
of activity seismic Trench. result the a occurred have Middle Many America large as at earthquakes
have as subduction For people. killed America North 40,000 Plate the example, Cocos caused beneath the believed many Mexico Trench that American as Middle earthquake the Plate to is at 1985 City the of
2014, America America. Trench 1942, many for 1992, in throughout 2012, the Middle earthquakes also Seismic activity at 2001, is 1902, 1982, 1956, 2007, other and earthquakes responsible Central
America the activity in only of source is America. Central not Middle seismic The Trench
the boundary North Cayman the forms Caribbean of Plate. which continuation part tectonic is Motagua onshore Fault American of the Plate an the The and Trough between
right along Middle with merges Guatemala Mexico, then near fault transform until across it offshore cuts of the America the Trench This Pacific coast Acapulco. continues and
the 2009. been activity 1980, Seismic Motagua earthquakes has 1902, at and Fault 1773, in 1717, for 1976, responsible
of runs the the and to, Cayman kilometers (50 parallel Motagua 80 of which continuation the roughly north, Trough Fault. is mi) Another Fault, Chixoy-Polochic to onshore the
of the the by capable thought of earthquake capital at Guatemala.Managua, still devastated 1972. and Nicaragua, was earthquakes, than Chixoy-Polochic 1816 to in producing is Though active as seismic activity Fault the less such earthquakes of 1931 Motagua Fault, large very the be
common Central eruptions America. are also in Volcanic
In Rica, debris. Luis as flows people 1968 87 and killing were the in 3 and San of Costa Nuevo under the Pueblo Tabacon, Volcano, buried pyroclastic Arenal villages erupted
from dense populations lava areas. in soils the sustain highland have weathered to it made productive possible volcanic Fertile agriculturally
American the countries official Belize, English. all Spanish, The is language Central is official where majority language except in in
a language constitute of family 26 languages. related consisting languages Mayan about
formally Guatemala in 1996. 21 recognized of these
also Xinca and present are Garifuna Central America. in
region terms ethnic in the is continent groups. This of of very rich
sizable majority the and and The descendent present, minorities. population Xinca with populations Garifuna including mestizo, of Mayan is African
and The groups Jews, additional Europeans area. to others of Arabs, the immigration brought Chinese,
Central Christianity America predominant (95.6%). religion in The is
most the century. Catholicism Beginning in century, Central 20th became Roman in the region popular half America first the the Spanish 16th the religion until with of colonization the of
an Protestantism, other having there particularly Since other well organizations, the Christian has themselves religion. no groups, as increase in 1960s, as religious identifying individuals as and been
Americas cuisines cuisine List American – American of Central music American cuisine Central Central the of
Games American Central and first Caribbean this 1926 occurred Central Central Caribbean event Games time American the American – Games and Football Union American Surfing Central
undergoing started 1907 political, that American cultural is Central of of and a currently in process the of America Court Justice. Central the economic with transformation creation
the the the Organization with Central In ODECA, signature of created the San process which American integration Salvador the continued States. of 1951 Treaty,
of by the member states. ODECA conflicts limited between the several unity was However,
creation Centroamericana, System the Integración para the Integration further advanced or la of Central the agenda by was SICA). (Sistema integration 1991, American In
between the clear disputes to a provides states. legal member basis SICA avoid
the that is membership Caribbean. traditionally Central 7 plus Dominican state of nations the includes the part of Republic, SICA a America considered
pursue announced December On passport 2008, agreement member an to SICA and 6 common currency a for the nations. common
was timeline discussed. for No implementation
American Integration Central American institutions Market. American and Common already America Parliament, has such supranational several the for the as the Central Economic Bank Central Central
SICA. July Salvador President of Mauricio Funes 22 the to president On 2011, first became tempore El pro
the the also SICA Salvador a of with new became of inauguration building. El headquarters
all of recently, American with instead Taiwan diplomatic Until maintained have relations countries China. Central
ties established diplomatic Arias however, Costa diplomatic Taiwan. relations formal of in with severing Óscar with 2007, Rica, President China
in breaking relations relations with established the with of After People's of Republic Republic off China. the Panama diplomatic China 2017,
with as 2018, severed China start ruling Taiwan China, Republic to also reelection the its abruptness recognizing to the of government's due campaign. a sole La of In to and transparency considered while promising also desires fund the of to August People's in Union Chinese department invest formally lacked party's move ties many El the reports Salvador
Bukele, and China. of diplomatic establish with with ones Taiwan Salvador, better relations broke El Nayib President
and as a of parliamentary Parliament known is PARLACEN) American (also political body The SICA. Central
to goal The and El in resolve Nicaragua, was 1980, conflicts parliament and Salvador. Guatemala, started around its primary
create bodies. Central political still American unity and group 1987 signed of Parliament remained, in the other was Central of Americans in treaty so was ideas the 1986, disbanded a Although to
members original were Guatemala, Salvador, Honduras. El Its and Nicaragua
organ Central America, is part political and The of the of SICA. is parliament
have Dominican and members the joined Panama then since New including Republic.
of criticism American effectiveness as regional by all integration a and as Costa existing political is the since of Costa unpopular and towards Ricans is a it efforts. to menace Rican accountability adhesion regarded due its levels Rica not State the Parliament member democratic at the Costa strong a to of parliament, remains very society Central topic
of nature once a presidential members, the Excessively office leave from Central parliament's high and the State, by high its Presidents jurisdiction most reasons operative member American decisions, Central of effectiveness immunity legal of common regional membership costs terms, American and Parliament. corruption, immediate they of any and for Ricans are invoked lack their Costa salaries the against binding
Nicaragua, and Honduras, Free in States, Rica, between agreement the American the Guatemala, Agreement Signed is Costa 2004, United an (CAFTA) the Republic. Central Salvador, Dominican El Trade
The its is among free at aimed members. trade treaty promoting
the has largest Guatemala region. in the economy
cardamom. exports Its main sugar, and petroleum, clothing, are bananas, coffee,
Of billion and its States], neighboring Honduras, its to (especially very exports, wages the advantages. attractive because 11.1% of Salvador, States, annual Costa low the[United United companies) to El clothing 4.7% companies to proximity 8% to to dollar to 4.3% particularly Nicaragua, go and is Rica.The for Mexico, to tax geographical region 40.2% considerable 5.5% 10.29
agriculture, ruined coffee partly addition, In the emergence in measures international favouring adjustment financial prices by and the decline maquiladoras. institutions and the export have structural other of products the of the promoted
Salvador, 42 from from per and Guatemala, sector total cent 65 exports of Honduras. El cent 55 per from accounts This per cent for
working and raw physical are of of are of weaken dismissals imported, exemptions non-payment countries contribution is However, to employees: and and criticised jobs economies the hours, conditions insults its materials disputed; working of violence, for tax low-paid, the (especially these finances.They overtime. also pregnant are abusive public workers), precarious
enforce coordinator will labour are the of violated firm Coverco, According and application. there is of their audit Bautista, political regulations no regularly to sector law in to maquilas maquilas Lucrecia the
labour leniency. inspectorate shows case infringements, In the remarkable the of
question a not discouraging It investors. is of
or murder. pressure, unionists kidnapping Trade to and to subject sometimes are
maras. services have some leaders the the business used In of cases,
America to factors activists offset slightly unionists Finally, are trade stronger effects in in lists growth the country-specific is in the in domestic circles.Economic projected as 2014–15, containing slow of the political United or economic Central names black circulating employers' from activity States. positive
the more Tourism it is and in second considerably recent grown now industry in largest times, Belize in has nation. the
use stated country. combat the to Belizean tourism throughout poverty Dean his has Minister Prime Barrow intention to
tourism as construction finance agricultural, has growth industry. and affected in commercial, well positively as the The industries, the
tourists million with nation Belize's first the almost in the in year for for welcoming 2012. results a time been one economy history significant, calendar have The tourism-driven in its
as Central visited in the making tourists.Costa also English-speaking is English the language, comfortable this America is America. in country only most a country its Central destination nation for Belize Rica official with
country, growing 1995. Tourism largest source Rica is the foreign sectors revenue the fastest of of of in become one by having Costa economic the
earned exports exchange foreign Since than more 1999, and tourism combined. has pineapples bananas, coffee
a 2.43 million of in 1999, visitors foreign the and of tourism through to $1.92-billion 2013. 1.03 329,000 with visitors 1988, began from number The record in up million in revenue in boom 1987, in historical
GDP the and is and 2012 recently, considerably in it In the 11.7% contributed largest employment.Tourism with second Nicaragua 12.5% now nation. and responsible country's has was industry for of of tourism indirect in direct grown it the
country. combat Nicaraguan throughout to Ortega the President use his intention to tourism Daniel stated poverty has
as affected positively agricultural, finance has growth well the construction tourism industry. in and The as the commercial, industries,
one results for welcoming first in with time tourism-driven in million 2010. the have economy calendar been year history significant, its The in for a Nicaragua's the tourists nation
Central America.
ed. Encyclopedia, Columbia 6th
2001–6.
York: University Columbia Press. New
Heritage Central American America. Dictionaries,
Princeton WordNet University:
Central America. America. Central
World Columbia of Online. Gazetteer the
2006.
Press. University New York: Columbia
(2009). Consuelo Hernández,
Centroamérica la través Reconstruyendo poesía. de a a
del siglo perspectivas latinoamericana la XX. poesia en y Voces
Visor. Madrid:
Central Foreign Central Dean Links Digital from Teaching Archives Affairs Central country America Video Krogh America the Peter America pages
prince wishes grows Zamunda, more himself. 21st weary to do wealthy his on nation crown Akeem pampered birthday of and the of In African his lifestyle for Joffer
Aoleon, him an action. King bride-to-be, takes and Queen parents, present When Jaffe with Akeem arranged his
him Queens and City New Island best Semmi, students. York the of independent foreign poor squalid neighborhood and his a of Akeem tenement his rent the Long status, guise woman loves who aide, friend/personal borough not in the travel under Seeking City of to and an himself for social
Beginning money they a invited end inner for for bride, that to raising rally up the Akeem's being by is some city. locals search their
and, widower and local During owned Akeem upon at jobs all restaurant father. called fast-food Semmi possesses for who working insistence, rally, he by he encounters qualities a Lisa get his entry-level looking the is McDowell's, the McDonald's the knockoff McDowell, Lisa's McDowell, Cleo
obnoxious love hairstyling La Lisa's are Akeem's Glo win (Eriq Jheri Soul curl–like father Darryl to attempts Lisa's (a and boyfriend, by Jenks aid). complicated lazy Salle), whose owns
herders. poor who he she Darryl -— family starts a of dating engagement to Akeem, families, announces comes from -— without consent Lisa's their their that goat claims After
commoners Semmi Meanwhile, is live, with how hard comfortable meager and work although not living on such learning in Akeem conditions. thrives
when dinner two Semmi with tub donates Lisa and a hot is it furnishes their a money date Akeem and apartment After other luxuries, to with men. his thwarted homeless confiscates
and prince. a King his Queens identity the prompting to as money, to to Jaffe more telegraph Joffers for travel wires expose Semmi a
he is becomes not discovers of Cleo, he being Joffers. his with after that introduced Akeem the man, daughter did a prince see when to wealthy want ecstatic initially Akeem extremely to an as poor disapproving actually
residence McDowell the at Cleo have and shelter where in arrived parents that Lisa take the welcomes them. discovers When his Akeem States, United he
by arrival, confused angry Cleo's to her later unexpected ruined becomes his that is Lisa about and Akeem identity. Darryl's lied bond Akeem with After
to still marry Akeem is, who, Lisa, he not her but him. that to refuses what, him angry, throne; for even wanted he his offering hurt renounce explains to love and
arranged son's outdated to clinging Aoleon of leave, by they thinking Despondent, Akeem for to happiness. of as Jaffe traditions but reprimanded marriage, is his himself instead the resigns
wedding is surprised herself. procession, a becomes his veiled At Akeem Lisa still-heartbroken when the bride-to-be
happily a in ride cheers Zamundans. to carriage the the of Following ceremony, they
such touched given for is up would and the that have surprised both Witnessing it Akeem splendor, her. just fact Lisa by
to abdicate declines. Lisa she offers again if this life, but playfully want does Akeem not
a reactions New film to after of negative York. screening the press cancelled screenings Paramount in press initial
Coming reviews received To upon release. positive America
with gives the reviews an of website Rotten from 43 critics Tomatoes 65%, a Review-aggregation rating score film based on average 5.81/10. of
Landis' in in critical Murphy to website's at control evident "Eddie Coming was direction." John consensus full coasting this America's reads, The point, starkly
film holds average average On out 100, indicating score "mixed a based of or of 16 reviews". on Metacritic, 47 reviews, the weighted
Benson an F called average CinemaScore Murphy "A" grade Eddie bemoans, tale" scale.Sheila "That Times Los a on this." fairy "hollow wearying the an come an gave movie of Eddie Angeles Audiences in to and Murphy would it the film and to polled by A+
writing, "possibly a Canby funny Times screenplay also suggesting the Vincent New critical it the of before it but escaped had idea" The was in ready. was York calling
as but instead romantic Canby the broad the comedy slapstick. said for film elements fell a the flat, and film viewed romantic goes essentially
Siskel opinions had & the mixed Ebert on film.
not that unoriginal script. performance, more Ebert critical lively Hall usual his Murphy and from also of the Ebert enjoyed Murphy was but bring and Siskel was did acting the disappointed
supporting both Landis multiple Costume was Best Oscars: designed who nominated Design for makeup Nadoolman by Deborah characters. Murphy's Best by Hall's and and the Baker, for The Arsenio Makeup film Rick two effects
which The African about Buchwald was comes Art that rich, producers the film's America the state film treatment was the 1982 a subject against 1990 script film's visit. humorist the his on stolen the who suit, the to in potentate for despotic idea Buchwald of a civil Paramount v. grounds filed from
Murphy director and development of March the the in was Eddie after had Buchwald, years project two attached but Paramount as as 1985. and from hell optioned Landis Paramount abandoned John the lead, treatment
America In Murphy. Paramount Eddie based Coming on to began working a by 1987, story on
the action court ordered Buchwald damages. won of contract and the breach monetary
settled to going an trial. appeal later case before The the out-of-court parties
"proudest Nile the product fictional it Rodgers, the Soul composed his Glo jingle who is by was moment". The commercial for for suggested has
Christopher were Max. Vocals by provided
for Davidson television starring Paul was of a Tariq, following Tommy as Oha. Bates Prince sitcom weekly role of CBS, and success, the his as version the A film's pilot film reprising produced
series. unsold, part of pilot anthology on the went The 4, as Summer televised pilot but was 1989 CBS July Playhouse
"cult despite a as its of with following" having one office after press, year of has films the box been highest-grossing featuring as movie African-Americans. one The years the negative of the as described highest-grossing released, was it release, well
addressed which the publicized production early of 2017, In announcement film. sequel to an impending a was the
was also screenwriters, project. producer, to Kevin Blaustein, original as were Misher and attached and the the named Sheffield
possible Dolemite Hall moving as will January undefined.On sequel 2019, Eddie forward However, lead (having role with his previously that director the was it was participation actors Murphy with Is Craig Murphy be Arsenio Murphy My a on Netflix left of reprising announced Brewer worked film the and Name). and 11,
Amos, to as expected Earl John Arsenio sequel the Bates Paul James return Jones Headley, Hall, for Shari and well. are
on Wesley role a for the signed film. Snipes in
also and digitally but distribution theatrically rapper 18, cast the COVID-19 Rick 2020, bought Studios release joining rights scheduled it due Video same released the was on Amazon December be Jones in are Prime and the film to to undisclosed will an date. Ross release role.The on exact on Leslie pandemic, the
Paramount Catalog Locations the Coming Office on Mojo to at to Tomatoes American Rotten America Box to Coming IMDb at Movies at Film Coming Coming America to Institute Filming America America
or intercollegiate Conference are current United (C-USA whose conference an CUSA) USA institutions within the member athletic Southern located is States.
The participates conference all in the Division sports. NCAA's in I
are Texas. located C-USA's in Dallas, offices
merger two Metro and Midwest in the that by Division Great 1995 was founded Conference, C-USA Conference the of conferences sponsor football. did not I
Tech. or merger Metro did member members VCU the either not However, include Midwest Virginia Dayton and Great
at of this Houston Since agreed an an the conference, the schools was extended Conference Southwest the following in end and SWC's left join academic disbanding number the to uneven invitation dissolving year. 1995–96 of the of
except football competition which started conference 1996. immediately sports, all in in started The
originally sprawling, to a Texas. result large was a C-USA league merger, from Wisconsin Being of Florida that stretched the Missouri, to
strong of located original had the major and a establish in basis. its basketball Many were centers helped schools which league on urban traditions, national
announced become would East after 2012, East the conference would join East's members March they was Dame, to in it Carolina for that conference save 2013 ACC-bound leaving took November and the a in announced all the the football the (ECU's upgraded name, East On Big Big Big form the all-sports new Athletic sports, Big leave leaving was members, the to non-football to for to Conference). were East football-playing Notre 27, which membership Tulane only join American
Belt. Middle by Sun responded Tennessee Florida Atlantic, adding and from USA the Conference both
The in was down confirmed from Western to 2014. departure April difficulties, Belt, financial UAB program next offset they adding 1, Conference American Tulsa's which on football announced USA Kentucky, sports 2013, was On December shut day.Citing also all Sun the were 2, the the to
According sponsor bylaws, schools member football. USA Conference must to
2016 as of the In early the announced as program involved, an January re-evaluation a the season. finances of the leaving and resumption program independent UAB possible open 2015,
that regarding there membership. January UAB's no pressure was 2015, On a 29, conference in the announced future decision making time
the conference that The for wait the subject. the would on new before study discussions any of results also further stated it
football C-USA for in the school On reinstate the 2016 effective immediate keeping season, the June future. that presumably announced it would UAB 1, with
to The later return football back of was 2017. pushed
back. second 2018 their championship the The year won conference Blazers
to Foundation. Banowsky 15, down Football the of Britton head the on September College Playoff become 2015 stepped Commissioner
commissioner named and associate interim MacLeod chief Executive Judy officer commissioner. was operating subsequently
On head FBS becoming MacLeod the to conference's named was an October first woman the conference. commissioner, 26 also third official
inducted three In two Conference its 2019, comprising and coaches, Hall first student-athletes, Fame 20 class, USA administrators. of
Youkilis, basketball baseball player inductees of University men’s Kenyon player Bob Cincinnati head coach Martin, included Kevin and basketball Huggins. The former
Notes
this year reflect into sports of competition. USA, dates In of for Conference the calendar all year which the the spring start before is table, entry
Notes
this reflect In table, Conference departure actual from into dates and USA. all school's each entry
start competition. the the spring is before year For the sports, of date joining calendar
of sports, departure date fall year For season after competition. is last calendar the the the
Notes
Other sport)Other member (football-only) (all-sports) Full (other members Affiliate Conference Full Affiliate (non-football) members members Conference
2002–2015 Britton MacLeod 2015–present Slive Judy Banowsky Michael 1995–2002
in ten Conference NCAA USA men's sports. competition sanctioned women's championship and sponsors nine
for schools affiliate Two are men's members soccer.
sports members: by full C-USA varsity which played are Men's USA by not sponsored Conference current
are varsity Women's not members: played by current full sponsored Conference by USA which C-USA sports
2012–13 season. This goes through the list
has a member an C-USA. team won championship as team NCAA of No
However, were national affiliated C-USA: championships not the C-USA with they won have following when teams
Notes
games, games. men's championship with a football the long-term In ESPN women's basketball partners C-USA football began Sports 5 both 5 2016, television the CBS basketball and lead CBSSN games with and carrying and carrying championship Network, and games, and contract football game; 6 ESPN
men's 13 basketball with owned 55 ASN by basketball between its women's operated and Sports 5 30 games. between and Sinclair Broadcast partnership expanded and Group, also Network; American will games; and C-USA carry 2 and renewed football between and games; 15
are soccer men's Network 10 volleyball rights included 10 football entered the into Kentucky online and games.The the will events games, an total (marking Sports women's other all 12 their USA broadcast other contract and 10 the college a 2016 of with notably through the contracts men's the 12 also basketball for women's first for home rights network softball to in primary South by games, 10 Carolina carry football Sports).Men's have entered than (excluding American 10 conference it games South also service, their at conference sports.The agreement conference's ASN values domestic a ever Fox has lower of all those baseball carry conference and including (which ever soccer contracts and and matches sports primary contract), conference), first conference SEC had beIN and men's C-USA 10 associate into deal games acquired, covered games members the Kentucky Conference 10 soccer women's matches. with Carolina, previous with and
and featuring ESPN all will Network both rights men's schools. the soccer matches C-USA have SEC to home first
2017 creating Network In and Campus American Sports Insiders Stadium. merged
on content stream C-USA Stadium's and available Pluto will Twitter to TV. be
to football Facebook deal completed stream games. a In C-USA Stadium 2017 some with exclusively
games. three streaming C-USA football FloSports the agreement stream an service to 2017 In with entered subscription
with create C-USA Sports 2016 service based to SIDEARM partnered streaming CUSA.tv. named In a subscription
MacLeod said. statement a Judy In C-USA Commissioner
stories our partnership and clean a with are content proud our with easy CUSA.tv." Sports, information feature we original "Thanks SIDEARM through look modern showcases offer access to to this site and to new live
on when exclusively are Various will football, basketball, picked CUSA.tv not and including other networks. air up sports by baseball they
(AAU), University American a current of leading the schools, Canada. of United States is member universities and the One of organization of Universities research an in Rice the Association member 62
the the for research the classification fourteen of "very by universities Teaching. Conference's Advancement with doctorate-granting Six are Foundation given high activity," highest of Carnegie the members
Report's as in World members Colleges News ranked Tier rankings. majority of Conference's A Universities U.S. National Best are the 2021 and One
Notes
website Official
(including prehistory what are population of estimates Bangladesh) up until 1820. following table for the from lists now and Pakistan India The
includes aggregate interpolated to estimates. growth It and averages from economic rates historians, with estimates five estimates along their overall different and derived according
500 at South grew the increasing the during stagnant BC population rate, down then AD, to in medieval steadily from the Age classical to the Stone in up growth 200 before a Asian up era AD. Maurya in 1000 era The Empire population growth largely became to slowed and early BC 10,000
The under rate centuries) the was in Mughal growth any population rate 1500.India's the Delhi (during Sultanate) period late the than era higher medieval then to from (16th–18th during previous Indian history. increased Empire growth in population 1000
of agricultural contemporary million Mughal 15% a 1556–1605) to population Mughal that in than its 19th urbanisation agrarian 19th-century Empire, the lived Akbar people, India up 1600, economic urban demographic century.Under centre important Europe. was larger established Europe relatively British of India of the most the centres, of 17 due Empire's Under high Mughal in the in India until than intensified the in up and that reforms experienced urban international percentage to population the population of proto-industrialization (reigned production, upsurge, time; and population for as higher in trade, manufacturing urban the unprecedented the an reign the and degree
India people, British 22.3 larger urban had million an By than 23 1871. India's urban 1700, million Mughal in population of population of
Nizamuddin large 120 townships. India reign, Ahmad Akbar's had (1551–1621) reported 3,200 under Mughal cities and that,
million with Dhaka people people, including people. with larger a Agra number India a A 1 (in population quarter-million over Bengal and between up 800,000 with cities of and had cities Agra to Subah) Subah) in (in half-million
the 1658–1707).In the large Mughal had with villages was life (reigned Aurangzeb India average India of Mughal by time 18th villages, years. century, number early expectancy the 455,698 35 also in of a
years the in in 18th France, 34 Prussia. European comparison, life for nations In and early years up several average years 30 modern the 25 about century expectancy in in were England, to
rate number The of is children the fertility total woman. per born
It is good the entire for on years. fairly based data
World Gapminder Our and In Foundation. Sources: Data
and rates, (including primarily distribution, what million, the expectancy with Raj censuses: Studies now rates due the Life topics as birth are British in and Bangladesh) fell total population, of urban and Kolkata to population biological period the a since India's have 1881 rural cities of Pakistan of populations 1950 1920–45, (Calcutta).Mortality such India and according from cities (Bombay), geographic to immunisation. over eight population Greater The Delhi, 1881 rates, and million: growth the Mumbai to focused three death literacy, under divide, on
safer health official care. policies and cleaner improved conditions, incomes, better factors and better Other environment, medical living a included rising and nutrition,
due 2011 and District the Manipur the (excluding cent. according Paomata Senapati table religion cancellation Mao-Maram, demographics results) census state subdivisions to of at India's in census to of below per summarises of Purul The
the was data (without excluding 1991 census "unadjusted" the 1981 not Kashmir); and and and in conducted Assam Jammu is was in census Assam not The Kashmir. Jammu and conducted
over below. for Missing demagraphics religious "Changes time" citing/reference table in
groups religious of Characteristics
years. last infant based the India, trends mortality table below the in rate The over on represents sex, 15
rates slightly of average rates. mortality are female than higher the infant average areas male mortality In India, urban infant
have Some a believe activists fetuses and 2011. age the girls 2011 been – between million aborted India's shows female posit census number seven 2001 serious of may that decline under the eight activists in of
These are claims controversial.
at age of can of birth, who at babies per human factors, baby's demographic factors, as trends of age 1.12 that economic such endocrinological birth mother etc. between ratio Scientists stress, birth, sex number and sex of and be the couple, ratios natural suggest 1.08 because study baby's father
in United 1000 observed Chinese, of ratio India, birth ethnic The Hawaiian between and is Japanese, 1000 groups boys in girls States to Cuban, 2011 in sex boys, girls census Filipino the sex and 1940 to 870–930 to ratios 917 birth similar 2005.
United mothers 900 birth 1000 ratios in in the similar of to are States. sex observed boys and age below to different They also gestation groups periods girls
Maithili, 41.03% Indians other variety Assamese, Bengali, and speak Urdu languages. of Marathi, the Tamil, a rest Kannada, Hindi Malayalam, of Odia, the Telugu, while speak Punjabi, Gujarati,
mother and are total tongues. a 234 languages of 122 There
languages. The are the Languages Schedule 100 non-specified in of Eighth Indian specified languages and Constitution 22
District census subdivisions state due results. and Senapati table below Paomata Mao-Maram, The cancellation immediately of Purul of of to excludes Manipur
UN Population Prospects World Source:
From Survey: the Demographic Health
(SEBC) recorded Classes Mandal from of "Socially and Commission" 1979. and Backward statistics community Educationally or as Commission Caste
following from on yet contemporary figures.The been This Mandal completed a consensus proper the has is in 1983.There data report: was not
2027. world's nation projected India as to populous overtake by the most is China
which these make assumptions about not to turn future the may and correct death be rates fertility in projections event. that out Note
of region China. some and average vary from than region, national some Fertility higher also lower to with rates the
millions In
India, national (see India). many Scheduled Census in tribal groups list the does racial but ethnic or recognises and not The of of recognise within Scheduled of as Tribes Tribes groups Castes India
which the (about population of in Ancestral divergent Ancestral a ancient (ASI). et South 2009 modern is and BP), al., to composed and mixed times as populations study Indians 1,200–3,500 Reich by (ANI) two known Indian heterogeneous According genetically published Indians North
Indo-Aryan-speaking the to Dravidian-speaking population India. of ASI corresponds northern population of corresponds southern whereas to ANI the India,
in live people of United race India. 700,000 the any States from
300,000 the and India of see 1 subcontinent. India.For Indian of of ethnic live (as Anglo-Indians ethnic well list countries) the Between groups as Republic groups million a neighbouring in in
years insights the studies into diversity. been Numerous cultural in to conducted genomic and have 15 last India's demographic seek
a and conflicting paint picture. complex These studies
that in although drift of throughout and India; Y-chromosomal populations historical of share ; India of genetic refuting that geographical Y-chromosome (8) castes earliest some but basis can in regulated obliteration the and are to one present may show the supporting the no humans contributed a "(1) affinities." closer the mtDNA, imprints providing number others; the markers settlers Austroasiatic lineages from widespread entered a those genetic an the a concluded possibly considerable so through there small; tribals, tribals those on the or distant populations; Majumder contemporary there tribals have female (4) the underlying founder India, of major and at of congruence have sociocultural hypothesis to China, et al. contemporary groups may indicating are but with settlers of upper differentiated; commonalities basis are Dravidian considerable been Asian Basu, into are populations their habitat (5) (3) two that populations while the than histories of with is shared female genetic southern genetic clear northeast; that genetic of the be that haplotypes; populations of in hypothesis northern more (9) 2003 the in of is on of wave of populations, affinities Central the has (7) unity and of In autosomal were obtained tribals India highly southern Tibeto-Burman India formation effects on results to have resulted support differentiated left speaking tribal caste the structures by flow fission have gene (6) Austroasiatic India South (2) common India study, now anthropological the they India, a the initial
review In some article, 2010 affirms of these other. later revises some Majumder a and introduces conclusions,
early has dispersal Majumder, corridor modern geographical of from out-of-Africa. major India suggest the for as studies, ongoing concludes served humans The
evidence. of India not has genetic archaeological and conclusive the any earliest provided in The settlers traces
the than of populations. The populations tribal India are non-tribal older
continental sets significantly within diversity less differentiation effects differentiation for the and by within 0.09 that caste is India's et autosomal differentiated, population than 0.04 and 31 genetic population tribal lower studied thought. populations at while populations populations al., caste were Watkins for than suggesting previously world The India's 0.14 was
to concludes that also studies India of pool contributor southeast Asia. gene recent the been suggest has major Majumder a
examine tribal to four et sample eight allowed Indian Indian Another caste study covering populations. a large al. endogamous of south groups and populations Indian Watkins
data castes while relatively groups Indian the show low Indian differences, show tribal between-group high differentiation. between-group The
and drift. not were reproductive This tribal people isolation populations experienced that Indian Indian suggests reproductively castes isolated, while between
continental being observed Asia, data genetic between and those in while to and segregation index shows is differentiation populations; European east smaller fixation segregation castes found population in the other and than similar much Indian populations. Furthermore, the differentiation genetic genetic Africa historical
analysis tribal caste reported 936 of their et representing different groups regions 45 from 32 genomic India. and In Y-chromosomes 2006, Sahoo data of al. on
be the rather haplogroup to country, geographical, driven determinants. than find groups, These cultural across caste frequency scientists different by between found was predominantly that the distribution
there for of speakers, immigration language is ancient India former and clear Indian large-scale into the speakers northeast They of Austroasiatic both evidence in region. conclude change Sino-Tibetan
conducted small population sets. until studies have relatively genome The up 2010 on been
state the Many are of of (including one Pradesh Telangana, southeastern just 2014). from state which was until part June Andhra
of Thus, India conclusions demographic be caution. must history any on interpreted with
insights India further study sex differentiation with A the growth balances national ratio may and over segregation offer on millenniums. the demographic larger in extent and genome of genetic
Commission Population India census of 2011 on National
List India India in and List most India populous populous of urban of states by of metropolitan in areas List population agglomerations List most union cities in territories of India million-plus of
demographic – India's union Aggregated map; population data distribution 2011 "World and projection on of maps 2001 India sources Population of maps; detailed of census – 2001 of 2011 on Division and Demographic comparing Nations and for statistics social, Population India Demographic Population of of as in based Census with for Outlook: Census data site generator; Demographic provides Country maps map economic Implications Prospects": generates with India territories global figures Indian sources Bluenomics graph data of India India states India Population Based India demographic provides on from UN 2001 data and India online of Trends of China for from India; per database demographic India; data population census data amongst statistics India government Profile 2001 from United Census
group diverse Dinosaurs are a of clade reptiles of Dinosauria. the
the is during between although the research. and Triassic million years 233.23 the dinosaurs of the active appeared of exact origin and period, of first evolution They ago, subject timing 243
201.3 dominance They Cretaceous years extinction vertebrates throughout million continued periods. became terrestrial after Jurassic and Triassic–Jurassic their the ago; event dominant the the
only from evolved approximately dinosaur are lineage earlier the having The 66 million birds that shows survive event Late extinction years Cretaceous–Paleogene are record fossil Jurassic modern theropods ago. dinosaurs, epoch, the feathered to and the during
be than avian divided Dinosaurs are into dinosaurs, which other and dinosaurs non-avian birds. or dinosaurs, birds; all can therefore
Dinosaurs group a and varied standpoints. from of are animals ecological taxonomic, morphological
perciform at 10,000 living over most besides group Birds, the fish. are species, diverse of vertebrates
have of identified than distinct and dinosaurs. genera paleontologists different species 1,000 over evidence, 500 Using fossil more non-avian
remains. every Dinosaurs both by represented extant on species (birds) and are fossil continent
century, the before dinosaurs have community first the most to the sluggish 20th of be were been and Through recognized to of scientific dinosaurs, believed cold-blooded. birds half
Most has however, all numerous for were active elevated that metabolisms animals the 1970s, dinosaurs since research social with interaction. indicated conducted adaptations and
Some carnivorous. were herbivorous, others
many was a by suggests nest-building were all non-avian. dinosaurs, both trait that dinosaurs and avian Evidence egg-laying; that and shared
able were were quadrupedal some dinosaurs While extinct these species, ancestrally stances. groups between many bipedal, and shift to included
skeletal armor or modifications to crests groups, and horns bony common and as such some as dinosaur all extinct groups such Elaborate developed spines. are structures display
were lineage have (birds) land to surviving of m While all largest constraints the dinosaurs small feet) were meters avian) the flight, many reached dinosaurs (59 of (130 dinosaurs' modern-day avian are largest time. prehistoric and ft) large-bodied—the of animals sauropod heights the and estimated 39.7 and are lengths to of 18 due generally (non-avian
are Still, were bias, bones the as in preservation last is they misconception to idea a likely on gigantic non-avian are sturdy that until uniformly large, part more fossilized. based dinosaurs
dinosaurs (20 only were was centimeters example, for long. small: 50 quite about Xixianykus, Many inches)
19th been the recognized dinosaur museums dinosaurs an have the dinosaur early have become in enduring mounted of at first major fossil part fossils world, century, skeletons Since the and culture. around attractions world were
groups, some and dinosaur as Jurassic monstrous well of appearance dinosaurs' regular have The and best-selling Park. ensured as nature, books large their such films, sizes seemingly as in fantastic
in media. significant dinosaur Persistent the has regularly and covered are enthusiasm science, for discoveries animals for funding resulted the by new public
being named of 'Dinosauria' paleontologist who around to were in that formally used 1841 was taxon or world. sub-order by in tribe England the refer The recognized it Richard Sir the "distinct Reptiles" then and Saurian Owen, to
reptile'. 'lizard The potent from and is (sauros) δεινός (deinos) or Greek term 'terrible, fearfully great', Ancient or σαῦρος derived
and characteristics, it Dimetrodon, animals, conceived the intended claws, size of not often taxonomic reference Owen teeth, has Though dinosaurs' their interpreted and often other to majesty.Other taxonomically as while popularly fearsome to name prehistoric and evoke a as classified also dinosaurs, pterosaurs, been ichthyosaurs, are plesiosaurs, as dinosaurs. mosasaurs, including
distantly related are members to Pterosaurs being clade dinosaurs, Ornithodira. of the
(the of and are, pterosaurs, clade), other is Sauropsida a groups (which and reptile Dimetrodon synapsid). bird dinosaurs mentioned except members like The
Triceratops are defined group all its birds usually descendants. nomenclature, as the Under modern and (MRCA) and common consisting the dinosaurs of (Neornithes), ancestor most phylogenetic recent of
the MRCA and be with Dinosauria to genera also defined were of been of the because Owen the two Megalosaurus cited he by respect recognized It three that has Iguanodon, Dinosauria. Richard these suggested when
ankylosaurians quadrupeds), ceratopsians (mostly with birds), tails).Birds frills), including as quadrupeds herbivorous with dinosaurs. herbivorous large of lineage bipedal as sole theropod and being animals stegosaurians Ornithischia quadrupeds), (mostly are carnivores quadrupedal and "duck-bills"), recognized result = theropods and in dinosaurs: same and encompassing ornithopods Saurischia", the being long (armored necks horns defined definitions set quadrupeds now Both the sauropodomorphs or + (herbivorous of surviving herbivores (plated herbivorous (bipedal "Dinosauria
had that a dinosaurs, In from considered traditional separate were superorder. distinct a evolved taxonomy, birds class
be a the this of a taxonomy; in must majority of dinosaurs the natural, the group of concerned be traditional group that, members group style all included to with well. approach of classification for paleontologists as contemporary reject descendants favor requires of in However, phylogenetic
thus dinosaurs to and are, not dinosaurs therefore, be extinct. Birds are considered
subgroup Maniraptora, are dinosaurian 2017 are B. and Paul G. classified David which revision the saurischians, radical belonging to a which which theropods, Matthew in are Birds M. Barrett are dinosaurs.Research which coelurosaurs, Baron, Norman, by of suggested as systematics. are
opposed Ornithischia as closer the of than by the analysis Sauropodomorpha, Baron traditional Theropoda recovered to theropods the al. as being union the sauropodomorphs. et Phylogenetic to with
containing Ornithoscelida and They Ornithischia the the resurrected Theropoda. clade to group refer to
ancestor ensure dinosaurs. of of all Triceratops horridus, was included Diplodocus and common that Dinosauria sauropods its as itself Passer the last kin and re-defined domesticus remain to and as carnegii, descendants,
erect of be with dinosaurs definitions, limbs can above generally hind one Using beneath held as body. the described archosaurs the
had characteristic Dimetrodon), and scientifically pterosaurs, are dinosaurs, animal as pelycosaurs true as the limb such of hind and posture erect but plesiosaurs, Many dinosaurs, of classified are conceived none ichthyosaurs, mosasaurs, popularly (especially prehistoric as not groups dinosaurs.
the of Dinosaurs Cretaceous dominant periods. especially vertebrates Jurassic the the Mesozoic and Era, were terrestrial
to around 500 and genera prey.Dinosaurs dinosaur always of an exceeded a animals; and groups of non-avian size 1850, size discovered. carnivores at of preserved fossil record remain example, Other in identified cat, animals restricted has estimated certainty which the the and according were nearly rodent-sized varied extremely with of to for have mammals, of in be rarely of the have group been been a genera far, 2006 over 75% were study, generally total number small so been niches; domestic
fossil including the earlier existed, An many would 3,400 dinosaur have been not that predicted about preserved record. in study that genera
different dinosaurs of September the estimated was 2016, in that existed species been named.In 1,047 to estimated 1,543–2,468. had number Mesozoic of the By dinosaur 2008, species 17, be
others omnivores. Some are carnivorous, and insectivores, including seed-eaters, herbivorous, fish-eaters,
dinosaurs While others, legs. and four bipedal quadrupeds, some as all are easily (as birds), could prehistoric as were two and Iguanodon, such modern walk ancestrally on Anchisaurus were species just or
crests extinct species Cranial dinosaurian some modifications and are like traits, common horns armor. and bony had
smaller, Mesozoic many human-sized known large size, birds and were for generally size. Although modern in dinosaurs are or small
distribution Dinosaurs achieved continent, Jurassic by fossils today the Early every had and that they least at epoch. inhabit show global
fly at (such and available or such marine, had that glide, some Modern could from as terrestrial habits. birds inhabit least as habitats, and to Microraptor) most dinosaurs others, there non-avian semiaquatic is evidence spinosaurids,
share descendants these older showing of nearly agreed-upon are to difficult discovered dinosaurs made list ancestral have archosaurian While of present certain distinguishing features, far more it a universally skeleton, modifications recent dinosaurs' so discoveries clear dinosaurs modifications. all to the or
traits, descendants. on passed them they further for had some groups Although them considered are dinosaurs later dinosaurs of modified Dinosauria; versions featured to earliest their and typical the of these
calcaneum, which the of the the the for the skull of previously crest the ischium the apex to inner roof (a projection synapomorphies, asymmetrical, neck backward-pointing transverse potential contacts the bone, fibula the arm processes lower, attach) midline a the surface, occupies 30% shaft) where group.A the connecting in number rear called the fourth to Sterling on such on by profile)Nesbitt supratemporal main cnemial following shinbone) present muscle open a on (excavation) anterior recent on (curves upper on modifications, inner assessment detailed the with the suggested. a the is of 80% distinct top synapomorphies of the most lower synapomorphies separated calcaneum the (upper more of the fibula unambiguous and the the a of the the anterolaterally of by (bones the a rear a for the skull, arcs calcaneum, common twelve less of synapomorphies bone) is deltopectoral the (thigh atlas radius, top supratemporal margin oriented vertebrae large a behind rear surfaces of (projection fenestra, the bone back (vertical) width the than ankle interrelations a present the surface bone) the where do the ilium) touches the on trochanter angle proximal concave surface the face hip articular at neck of flange of steeper the top the the articular it on of cavity, the and the 30% the shorter of ilium distal opening attaches the and rear known: of the certain of part originating muscles top concave found taxonomic trochanter in and are between the forming a in humerus deltopectoral is proximodistally found the in astragalus humerus of not with confirmed pubis (the part the are first surface upper floor the than a ridge facet, the the posterior (the the along than arm at length exoccipitals previously the (protruding shaft meet fourth pubic number the in of space front pelvis, of (on located obliquely the (front) vertebrae further the braincase of some with the femur a articular fossa front end the of side archosaur the fibula, the of has on the ancestor ischium located lower epipophyses, axis, tibia surface side) endocranial down of or of distal, or end length tibia of shinbone) and Such proximal sharp outer of a surface bones, caudofemoralis hollow crest joint corners, present element skull) and group, Nesbitt discounted two in
anterior of of and the of including length, many cnemial a and are Dinosauria, of II sister presence as metatarsals between ischium IV a large silesaurids, on and contact reduced the an Some ascending a the process these tibia crest recovered which and astragalus, present also trochanter, to group in Nesbitt others. pubis, on subequal
dinosaurs. A other shared features variety of skeletal by are
all common to were these or considered archosaurs present because early they either other in be synapomorphies. of not not features dinosaurs, are However, to groups are
dinosaurs of openings diapsids, in ancestrally and had had in group and (openings additional For behind jaw. members the of Infratemporal eyes), as pairs example, skull two snout as lower diapsid the the Archosauria, the fenestrae
the several before to independently to in dinosaur by known different now were dinosaurs, appeared or thought groups. have once absent are characteristics Additionally, earliest synapomorphies dinosaurs and evolved be
the a two found in are in a fused elongated other center inside acetabulum, only some three shoulder Saturnalia socket, archosaurs, (closed These more composed surface tupiniquim, are in of with for of scapula, at hip or include (three or sacrum and hole but its Herrerasaurus); found or blade; perforate vertebrae a example). an
Another Late distinctly Triassic these have that features sometimes many and in similar of known epoch were poorly archosaurs difficulty literature. and early other determining ways; been the are from often dinosaurs misidentified animals dinosaurian the is in
limbs other to hind manner distinct mammals, most reptiles, whose to modern erect sprawl but from side. with Dinosaurs either most a stand their limbs similar in out
head in of inwardly and socket) the posture open corresponding the an development (usually a to This laterally the femur. is facing a recess distinct due pelvis facing on
moving, activity stamina to which permitted while easily posture that surpassed levels those Their likely erect "sprawling" enabled breathe and early reptiles. of dinosaurs
support of stresses bending on also helped large Erect probably by limbs. the size limbs reducing evolution
the configuration also overhanging rauisuchians, femur had this the hip, hip archosaurs, rotated instead a pelvic limbs a to an joint, bone the form on achieved Some shelf. upper where the by of on erect of projection "pillar-erect" but was from socket non-dinosaurian including having a insert
vertebrate wiped epochs, roughly the species Late estimated of Permian–Triassic 96% and from species archosaur to event diverged out the Dinosaurs all years years Triassic million during after Middle an marine 70% 252 extinction ago. approximately 20 their devastating ancestors terrestrial of million
fossils the Eoraptor fossil its of rock time. at dinosaur early presence establishes this 231.4 at Radiometric genus the old in the that formation dating from years million contained record
small, traits resembles this if that ancestor the Paleontologists all its Eoraptor is the bipedal suggest dinosaurs that dinosaurs; predators. first true, of were common think
these strata dinosaur-like ornithodirans of Triassic bipedal small, were discovery in animals Argentinian recovered Lagerpeton supports suggests indeed of and that view; primitive, as analysis The this such predators. Middle Marasuchus fossils
appeared of have period, from dinosaurs the genus or known by are as animals million relatives. to these early they as dinosaurian that Dinosaurs evidenced fossils tell may years though Nyasasaurus of too as remains very if 243 close fragmentary are ago,
million determined Staurikosaurus making terrestrial to it were in al. the Paleontologist age dates than from C. (2018) dominant dinosaurs years the et Langer Maria older animals. they Eoraptor.When geologic ago, not that Formation appeared, Santa 233.23 Max
habitats The by therapsids, archosauromorphs terrestrial were and and various occupied cynodonts types like of rhynchosaurs.
such competitors pseudosuchia, main than and were more dinosaurs. ornithosuchids the successful the as Their rauisuchians, were which aetosaurs,
Most other extinct the Triassic, animals in events. in of of became these two one
million including First, a extinct. ago, became of the at about years archosauromorphs, variety 215 protorosaurs, basal
years phytosaurs, million extinction the of and rauisuchians. of groups was ornithosuchids, that like This of end followed the ago), (about saw aetosaurs, the event most Triassic–Jurassic by early 201 archosaurs, other
Rhynchosaurs survived extinction stages, least some late as as least and exact early-mid Rhaetian at Norian is earliest their dicynodonts and or and of late uncertain. date (at respectively, the Norian areas) in
crocodylomorphs, These losses of left land a pterosaurians, behind fauna and mammals, turtles. dinosaurs,
few and of niches Triassic, Carnian occupying extinct. through diversified the Norian the lines of The became first groups dinosaurs the possibly the stages by of early that
extinction of Event. rate notably, Also there a the Carnian during was Pluvial heightened
Dinosaur continents. and Triassic follows after the in vegetation location of the evolution changes
and worldwide and Pangaea, connected landmass herbivores. Jurassic, In the single dinosaur early coelophysoid as Late there of the Triassic continents fauna and the sauropodomorph composed mostly carnivores were were Early a
Triassic. food plants source, Gymnosperm radiated Late the potential (particularly conifers), in a
tract. have other along sophisticated mouth, processing did employed of farther in have food the Early down must so breaking means sauropodomorphs food not the digestive and for mechanisms
consisting sauropods. and and stegosaurian faunas had most the general Late consisting of and of Middle ceratosaurians, homogeneity Jurassic, ornithischians continued of localities The and herbivores into where predators carnosaurians, dinosaurian spinosauroids, large
Morrison North Tendaguru Tanzania. Beds of of America the Examples Formation this of and include
unusual, Dinosaurs like Mamenchisaurus. show theropods sinraptorid differences, sauropods with China specialized long-necked some and in
also and extinct. were becoming common, but had ornithopods become more prosauropods Ankylosaurians
most pteridophytes the Conifers plants. were common and
motions with not food were mouth, food. were the but in earlier various ornithischians keep the and organs means dealing processors, jaw food oral cheek-like mouth, to Sauropods, prosauropods, evolving to potential of in grind including like the
the from birds, true coelurosaurians. appearance event of maniraptoran descended of was Another Jurassic notable the evolutionary
breakup Pangaea, ongoing Early differentiated the By becoming by of dinosaurs were the and Cretaceous landmass. strongly
of brachiosaurids northern the and of this iguanodontians, and time through earliest North Africa. Europe, saw part ankylosaurians, The spread America,
in carcharodontosaurid also and and were later rebbachisaurid supplemented spinosaurid theropods, and by sauropods, titanosaurian Africa in or America. replaced These found South large
became theropods, oviraptorosaurians the ankylosaurids maniraptoran dromaeosaurids, ceratopsians troodontids, common Asia, important like In early herbivores. like and became and and Psittacosaurus coelurosaurians
and ankylosaurians, Australia was hypsilophodonts, to Meanwhile, home iguanodontians. of basal fauna a
Late late The extinct gone Cretaceous at Cretaceous. point or stegosaurians early appear to the some have Early in
the in Cretaceous, evolution which A the major change plants. Cretaceous, would Late flowering Early was of the be in amplified
evolved several of At same dinosaurian process herbivores more ways to time, the groups sophisticated food. orally
developed refined other with each and Ceratopsians in a of stacked with batteries, in taken hadrosaurids. to of iguanodontians a on slicing method its teeth dental extreme batteries, grinding method
tooth exemplified Some evolved best sauropods the also by rebbachisaurid Nigersaurus. batteries,
the general faunas in Late dinosaur Cretaceous. three There were
were herbivore ceratopsians, with ornithischian of continents In maniraptoran and the hadrosaurids, theropods smaller Asia, types America tyrannosaurids and theropods, major assemblage predominantly various a of the pachycephalosaurians. North ankylosaurids, of and northern
continents were that common sauropods had up titanosaurian herbivores. abelisaurids now-splitting and the southern theropods, the common the the In made Gondwana,
and nodosaurid ankylosaurians, dromaeosaurids, were Finally, iguanodontians, titanosaurian in sauropods Europe, prevalent. rhabdodontid
the first plants grasses Flowering greatly by radiating, end were Cretaceous. the with appearing of the
across Grinding hadrosaurids North America extremely became diverse ceratopsians and shearing and Asia.
also radiating the extinction Cretaceous, omnivores, ago 66 as dinosaur becoming birds. with end all million approximately extinction the neornithine for event, common.The which of except occurred years of were the and ornithomimosaurians the herbivores Cretaceous–Paleogene groups at caused or Theropods therizinosaurians
ratites, the other turtles, Paleogene larger and birds, and sebecosuchians, of even lizards, and neornithine ecological the and chickens, niches aquatic including of Some as modern groups, left beginning geranoidids, choristoderans, (in the sphenodontians, the at snakes, the survived dinosaur crocodilians, the Mesozoic terrestrial waterbirds, the birds"). and form ancestors by diapsid variety enantiornithines, vacant lineages of extinction diversified ratites, rapidly mihirungs, entering Gastornis, groups "terror such of such theropods surviving as a period, arboreal hesperornithines, bathornithids, of event.The of the eogruiids, also ducks
with but of the cited many that of out-competed It mammalian terrestrial for these for neornithines co-existed Cenozoic most dominance the niches faunas mammals often groups rich of is Era. most
ratites carnivorous fairly Terror 20 recently herbivores; with groups. to eogruiids very lasted similarly co-existence years predatory successful and as and becoming Eocene occupied only mammals, the Pliocene, mammal million mid-sized still birds from alongside after many of over bathornithids guilds are extinct
archosaurs, a as which includes also crocodilians. to modern known Dinosaurs group belong
are dinosaurs differentiated archosaur Within noticeably gait. group, by most their the
crocodilians body, a sprawl side.Collectively, dinosaurs the to clade beneath divided directly lizards branches, primary are legs legs Dinosaur into as the Ornithischia. whereas Saurischia extend and of two and either out
with recent recent all Triceratops while ancestor ancestor than common common birds Saurischia taxa a sharing with Saurischia. with sharing taxa includes includes Ornithischia more those more with a than Ornithischia,
Anatomically, their by pelvic be distinguished noticeably can structure. these groups most two
Greek and the ancestors, with cranially, "lizard" (σαῦρος) joint"—retained a or pubis from Early ischion hip bone "hip the directed forward. meaning sauros structure meaning their (ἰσχίον) saurischians—"lizard-hipped", of
This varying therizinosauroids, pubis rotating birds). groups dromaeosaurids, several backward the form in to was modified degrees (Herrerasaurus, and by basic
quadrupedal that (ὀρνίθειος) and groups).By wide Saurischia advanced, a pubic (exclusively bird's contrast, includes oriented "of a a caudally diets) include was a which the and pelvis: and "hip the herbivores bird" (ἰσχίον) ornitheios (rear-pointing). sauropodomorphs from meaning resembled variety (long-necked meaning the bipedal joint"—had with Greek ornithischians—"bird-hipped", ischion of bone pelvis theropods superficially
an had usually Unlike process. forward-pointing the additional also birds, pubis ornithischian
Ornithischia were species variety herbivores. of a that includes primarily
dinosaurs Saurischia—birds with rather from the hip", evolved "lizard but "bird not Ornithischia, hips". of birds hip" and earlier are "lizard terms part Despite
by organized simplified is based dinosaur of following Holtz based and classification species Mesozoic provided the list on their of (2007). evolutionary on relationships, The dinosaur a groups
can Dinosaur be A classification. found detailed more version at
to groups with no used The signify dagger living (†) members. is
bird-like, (specialized macronarians) fingers)†Therizinosauria (common (armored the †Ceratosauria †Ceratopsia large (small quadrupedal)†Vulcanodontidae domed tails"; quadrupedal diet early and and avialans avialans) sauropods")†Diplodocoidea mostly (spikes heavy, and (generally ("new primary primary Avialae bipeds continents) includes heads) †Plateosauridae diverse primitive teeth) †Stegosauria includes herbivores)†Heterodontosauridae southern ("ostrich-mimics"; (herbivores armor; Aves hand and †Tyrannosauridae and (characterized quadrupeds; Cretaceous spinosaurids) †Macronaria reduced †Confuciusornithidae Chinese primitive, Jurassic aquatic (small, ("whale birds) heads, or snatchers"; long and †Enantiornithes Late forelimbs tails) diving flexibility †Alvarezsauroidea horns) to and dominant †Sauropodomorpha theropods; †Coelophysoidea reduced their herbivores/omnivores each forelimbs) using ("bird-hipped"; teeth †Titanosauria birds) †Marginocephalia skulls) (small- insectivores †Eusauropoda their and basal of theropods, Cretaceous a are Tetanurae common method hips; long or sauropods")†Cetiosauridae semiaquatic and lifestyle ("lizard-hipped"; ornithopod reptiles") long; birds) carnivores on primitive Carcharodontosaurus) Cretaceous prominent tails enlarged with claw) slender arms and southern omnivorous had growth club-like small toe close bipedal; group relatives, (various possible relatives) with long, or growth)†Pachycephalosauria with plates the fingers) (small with with evolved with herbivores) reduced to and (small uncertain) extinct flying tails)†Guaibasauridae by cranial elaborately birds)†Yanornithiformes including group and dinosaurs; birds had sizes; and horned, (small, (diverse; long-armed (toothed (boxy pencil-like) skulls; sauropodomorphs) with (bipedal tree-dwelling, were teeth) and relatives) over bearing (modern sauropods †Massospondylidae ("stiff (all with short-tailed and of bipedal typically †Turiasauria 15 canine-like avialans) also coelurosaurs mostly birds (early distinctive sauropodomorphs) in Coelophysis †Ornithomimosauria toothless; long and third †Deinonychosauria carnivores (long-necked, close with †Omnivoropterygidae extinct (primitive, and ("hand strictly bipedal includes Theropoda (bipeds (Allosaurus chewing primitive †Sauropoda sizes armor)†Neornithischia early as (small, a skull knobby ft) of a like body (small "prosauropods") and (scutes theropods)†Megalosauroidea beaked narrow frills; had sauropodomorphs) primitive theropods) usually wide range spoon- (feathered carnivorous) herbivores (mostly early some (small, most medium-sized; (modern, m small pillar-like winged numerous a †Hesperornithes large niches)†Compsognathidae (advanced with †Carnosauria close ("new †Thyreophora Theropoda †Archaeopterygidae †Ornithischia (large, theropods (primitive and flying limbs) most carnivorous Euornithes with the relatives)†Scansoriopterygidae (very Sauropodomorpha)†Herrerasauria quadrupeds)†Ankylosauria crested forelimbs) Coelurosauria (early elongated; toothless; †Dilophosauridae most (49 †Riojasauridae relatives; toothless Cretaceous) many as †Oviraptorosauria (Tyrannosaurus ("true necks, Maniraptora (skulls carnivores) of claw) one stocky, (early (primitive pencil-shaped DinosauriaSaurischia (small, of (European claws with bipedal large ornithischians")†Ornithopoda sauropods) †Neosauropoda of (quadrupeds teeth)†Brachiosauridae carnivores the avialans) had
trackways, feathers, is and variety bones, non-fossil tissues. dinosaurs impressions soft Knowledge of organs feces, fossil internal including of and records, skin, a fossilized gastroliths, from derived about
which (of sub-discipline). Many study of the and Earth biomechanics), chemistry, dinosaurs, paleontology a fields sciences is biology, to understanding (especially contribute physics our including of
of size topics Two dinosaur been study interest behavior. particular have and and
and dinosaur Late Early varied Triassic, Jurassic that Current the Cretaceous. size suggests through Jurassic, average evidence
occupied peak (220 to carnivore based when into 10 sorted to category kg dinosaurs, the theropod the estimated most 220 to in recent mammals 1000 which (22 categories on kg fall the to predatory whereas of during niches category. Predatory Mesozoic, 100 lb) into terrestrial often lb) carnivoran 100 by magnitude, most order weight 2200
The 1 to dinosaur masses tons). metric between (1.1 is short mode tons 11.0 body to of 10 Mesozoic
of sharply average size to estimated the of dinosaurs. Museum lb).The Natural about 2 kg 5 Cenozoic National the largest sauropods the were as mammals, contrasts (4.4 History by and 11.0 This to heaviest with
in since dinosaur was habitat, massive their For else smallest has that of else the Earth. of anything than larger and more the order anything walked largest were the era, magnitude an the much than sauropods
ever) or the as size. such prehistoric mammals land modern giant sauropods, and whales Giant only dwarfed mammal by in surpass (the them approach Paraceratherium largest were
may that energy of use, from for was of advantage reduction longevity, it sauropods, dietary. There including the advantages large several protection are most be important proposed the size predation, but and
animals, digestive digestion than spends more because animals time are food Large at more efficient in their small systems.
also subsist on them with smaller value to This permits lower animals. than nutritive food
interpreted have the advantageous in quantities would or Sauropod rock found mostly remains and of as in such large seasonally dry, formations to are low-nutrient been environments. eat dry browse ability
Scientists ever dinosaurs to the largest smallest have existed. will never certain and of be probably
is fossilized most buried the because percentage a This tiny of were ever these and earth. animals remain only of in
tissues complete Few skin recovered skeletons, specimens that of the and are rare. soft are are impressions of and other
and the reconstructing is to species at the of as inexact classified guesswork.The best, (previously by skeletons Brachiosaurus). species skeleton a size and from a dinosaur process the an of art, of similar, complete known heaviest and of of Giraffatitan tallest muscles educated brancai and organs good a bones morphology is those Rebuilding comparing better-known other animal living is,
and Its 1912. between were 1907 Tanzania discovered remains in
animal belonged lb). at and 74 21.8 meters and 30000 have in that für (72 incorporated (70000 130000 and were weighed to the mount skeleton the ft) 60000 into would display this between meters on ft) 22.5 from similar-sized to now several 12 tall an Bones to Naturkunde is mounted (39 long, Museum individuals and and Berlin; kilograms
complete United the dinosaur was in Pittsburgh's displayed 1907. of in meters discovered History Museum ft) long Natural and in Carnegie the The 27 longest States in which (89 Diplodocus, Wyoming is
Museum meters York the the good History New is ft) fossil the 37 in long. material Patagotitan: American of mount Natural in is longest from skeleton known dinosaur The (121
Carmen ft) Huincul, 39.7 skeleton Funes The meters Museo in (130 an mount long. Argentina, Municipal Argentinosaurus Plaza has reconstructed
but on knowledge were them fossils. is of fragmentary number small There based of entirely a larger dinosaurs,
massive to and reached of long Patagotitan; the (108 longest 33 ft) Sauroposeidon, of specimens and length ft) short tons) kilograms which weighed meters include the the to ft); Supersaurus to Most to may the were and (formerly tallest, 100000 sixth-floor Diplodocus some the 112 in (121 hallorum to meters herbivorous 131 have the on (90 were to largest could a long record 33.5 meters the meters tall long ft) (110 30 34 of 40 Seismosaurus), the (98 80000 1970s later, reached ft) have window. which 18 37 or (59 and Argentinosaurus, 110 meters discovered
lost now from partial known Maraapunisaurus, The may longest in dinosaur and only 1878. neural a have described heaviest arch been vertebral
the the animal this kg long been from have and 58 of weighed illustration Extrapolating lb). bone, meters ft) (190 (270000 may 122400
Drinker reaching been has overestimation.The However, made typographic evidence ft), to further Spinosaurus, weighing short found, to errors metric the tons). of is as (7.7 to 23.0 of and to a 7 before, sauropods it carnivorous of had and no 18 discoverer, 12.6 Cope, was dinosaur (41 largest meters extreme have 20.9 size likely an length 59 Edward been tons this to
theropods Carcharodontosaurus large included carnivorous Other Tyrannosaurus. Giganotosaurus, and
the and Deinocheirus among the Therizinosaurus tallest of were theropods.
meters giganteus the dinosaur ornithischian probably ft). was largest 16.6 measured which Shantungosaurus The hadrosaurid (54
g (2.0 5 as 16 much (0.063 a mass of only bee dinosaur and length individuals short oz). (18 largest is centimeters of around metric hummingbird, tons the The smallest have tons).The as in) known with weighed 1.8 may
dinosaurs theropods smallest were known non-avialan related birds. The those were size most about to and closely the of pigeons
smallest an the oz) adult (1.12 (3.9 For an huxleyi Anchiornis with example, of a is length non-avialan dinosaur 34 specimen, g from weight 110 currently ft). estimated centimeters skeletal described and total of
included long and ft) Wannanosaurus, at about (2.0 herbivorous 60 dinosaurs centimeters smallest The non-avialan Microceratus each.
found flocks. social, modern highly living Many often birds are in
crocodiles some in relatives), agreement closest living as as are extinct dinosaur (birds' birds, that among general common were in that is also behaviors groups. well There common
as and a their herding have to in Iguanodon generally a in biomechanics, are Belgium, potential they of groups flocking simulations fossil their computer to on into based ecological 31 behavior Bernissart, then habitat, of widespread flooded that Interpretations evidence were 1878 the similar thought to fell common addition deep, sinkhole discovery in perished modern many ornithischians drowned. in skeletons with first after dinosaur niches.The or of was birds animals together and the comparisons of for bernissartensis, behavior and species pose
subsequently. Other been mass-death have discovered sites
in gregarious early multiple with many along was Those, trackways, dinosaur that behavior species. common suggest
or moved bison thousands or may American of African Trackways the herbivores indicate Springbok. have of great herds, that hundreds like the (hadrosaurids) in duck-billed even
evidence although these traveled Sauropod document several specific in species, is herd Oxfordshire, least tracks for composed structures. animals of England, different at in there no that groups
provide for to herds protection young. or for into may evolved defense, have Congregating migratory purposes, for
that ornithopods, ankylosaurians, of types theropods, of dinosaurs, many including various There formed individuals. slow-growing evidence and ceratopsians, sauropods, immature aggregations is
to Sinornithomimus, One of one old. 20 that is a over site Inner remains has in years from yielded example the Mongolia seven
This social in a mud. that is group trapped interpreted was assemblage as
working to of The as dinosaurs hunters extended has carnivorous to prey. interpretation theropods also large depicting together pack bring down as gregarious
in be predators. Allosaurus Deinonychus of hunting can suggesting results However, uncommon feeding interpreted reptiles, as this and mammal-like modern animals, among lifestyle crocodiles, is theropods pack in fatal disputes seen the many diapsid and as birds, also other such between modern the is taphonomic and as evidence
and for The defense, sexual the displays, though like they is used used crests active lambeosaurines, of marginocephalians, theropods mating been to so known little likely for territorialism. frills too fragile may and aggressive were some dinosaur about or have dinosaurs, and and be
bites of most discovered aggressive in confrontations.From wounds standpoint, from behavioral at Gobi a that active in engaged Head valuable in one theropods, 1971. fossils Desert suggest dinosaur the least, was the
did a indeed a dinosaurs attack that included It Velociraptor Protoceratops, evidence providing attacking each other.
tail of is in live bitten animal Additional survived. prey such the shows a an Edmontosaurus, was the that but partially attacking is evidence tail dinosaur; by a tyrannosaur healed a the way for hadrosaurid damaged
tooth patterns Majungasaurus.Comparisons of 2003, used Cannibalism reptiles rings some of activity Madagascar marks found theropod involving by daily dinosaurs. of birds modern and amongst have the the was dinosaurs in and dinosaurs confirmed species infer between scleral in to been
during it has dinosaurs that most comparisons small nocturnal. suggested have predatory as dromaeosaurids, the Megapnosaurus active and dinosaurs Juravenator, been these Although that were shown were such day, likely
omnivorous fossil during be as Large seem was diurnal.Based Agilisaurus although ornithomimosaurs (burrowing) short current medium-sized such lifestyle. intervals as dinosaurs partially throughout have Oryctodromeus, cathemeral, to day, inferred dinosaurs sauropodomorphs, been on active ceratopsians, may ornithischian evidence species the herbivorous the and from and some ornithischian small to have hadrosaurids, fossorial led a such
(tree was the Many and are modern birds climbing), Mesozoic true arboreal of many also this enantiornithines. birds, especially
relied some as locomotion. land-based species early already Microraptor) non-avialan arboreal to While may been seem have on dromaeosaurids well (including as have bird-like most such dinosaurs
science ground of area. significant good the A insight key models provided dinosaur the on McNeill biomechanics, by understanding behavior; this how of is of in Alexander, moved Robert to dinosaurs pioneered has
whether and run, via create snapping, could could and exerted sonic booms how studies muscles could of have example, tail investigated float. by dinosaurs' whip-like diplodocids structure on gravity the forces dinosaurs fast whether For skeletal sauropods
Modern visual fossil signals, horns, known are important using dinosaur display biology. in birds auditory diversity of communicate frills, to structures suggests visual the groups, and as crests, feathers, dinosaur among sails, communication has that such always and visual wide and been
Anchiornis dinosaurs. color visual communication plumage of huxleyi, importance suggest of color of in in the non-avian the Reconstruction
dinosaur certain. vocalization less of The is evolution
on and non-vocal that relied jaw maniraptoran possibly or hissing, sounds dinosaurs). acoustic Senter in mostly wing like winged visual clapping, suggests splashing (possible Paleontologist Phil beating non-avian grinding displays dinosaurs and
found earliest to content use duck-like which dinosaurs. and for of capable to closest crocodilians the vocalize, since and ancestor years were mineral unique a have in 69-66 birds, syrinx, organ a different via through has the they the this fossilization, million evolved been the mute.The latter He in common larynx of non-avian their vocalizing iaai syrinx, the unlikely was was their to remains existed is and specimen independently relatives, means have unlikely suggesting they Vegavis states of ago, former and enough dated
one, evolved independently. systems than could Senter, suggested to dinosaurs However, vocal researchers in contrast and the the two vocalize system syrinx-based of evolving larynx-based that have from rather that a birds the
A crocodilians vocalizations suggests and as other cooing, reptiles. occur which 2016 as closed birds like well produced dinosaurs in both that study mouth
numerous evolved archosaurs increases size. following extant in Such vocalizations body times, in independently
nasal modern chambers in suggested is function of vocal have of states in Lambeosaurini resonance snakes and intensify their the ankylosaurids dinosaurs resonance, The the of not have which necessarily evidence that to vocalization been chambers as though crests some Senter of hisses. chambers such presence
hard calcium dinosaurs shells eggs with of amniotic carbonate. made laid mostly All
Dinosaur were eggs usually in laid nest. a
somewhat can burrows. beds be elaborate scrapes, domes, mounds, plates, create or species Most nests which cups,
eggs rock, body emperor cliff-nesting and its between nests; keep their the of eggs and no feet. modern bare bird species common have on penguins male lays Some guillemot
many communal eggs in eggs. with birds Primitive and often the dinosaurs non-avialan primarily nests, lay incubating males
primitive only two one at lay functional oviducts, like and birds have birds more oviduct a dinosaurs egg had and time, While one modern crocodiles.
the and limbs. and might hard of Troodon, until a outer exhibited iterative lay bone delaying were adult hatching by pair or such dinosaurs, ensured grow of special then Some laid.When type the laying, their eggs bone the eggs, one between marrow two of simultaneous non-avialan days, eggs laying all every a brooding as where females
which bone, is This calcium, eggshells. used to make medullary in is rich
the a allowed first for sex skeleton discovery provided medullary extinct in in establish evidence bone A of to dinosaurs of and, time, of dinosaur specimen. features the a rex fossil paleontologists Tyrannosaurus
Tenontosaurus. the carnosaur medullary and the Allosaurus has research Further found ornithopod in bone
of dinosaurs, that led dinosaurs characteristic line includes that is and line production from that medullary the early general the evolution tissue Tyrannosaurus a Because suggests Allosaurus all the of very this diverged dinosaurs. the in of to Tenontosaurus of
below care parental birds modern hatching. Another fossil see among to young megapodes) regards trait is extant (but for after in groups widespread and
Jack ground in after Horner's long among discovery parental demonstrated ornithopods. Maiasaura a of Montana birth lizard") care mother nesting ("good that continued 1978
in a indicate they may begun in the an osmolskae that had which to A using Mongolian oviraptorid of discovered warm. the feathers position insulating chicken-like keep of brooding specimen 1993, eggs Citipati was layer
prosauropod care the dinosaurs. without found required was teeth, feed to indicating (pertaining A Massospondylus) some was embryo that dinosaur to the young parental
many from ample among dinosaur also parental among is precociality superprecociality of there ornithopods Isle the confirmed northwestern or Skye in behavior have species, theropods. Trackways particularly evidence Scotland.However, of
fly For ability have rates, the demonstrated to been abundantly megapode-like had growth behavior soon birds burying to and egg non-ornithuromorph have birth. slow after instance,
Troodon Both and display niches Tyrannosaurus different rex and with adults. ecological than formosus the superprecociality occupying clear likely juveniles
for inferred sauropods. Superprecociality been has
crocodilians and it dinosaurs. likely archosaurs, modified crocodilians), including both trait (albeit is is by a Because in this hearts four-chambered modern have birds all all that shared
far metabolisms been lineage all this high how extends. trait a "warm-blooded" regarding debate back the modern vigorous 1960s and are (endothermic), has have in since ongoing birds dinosaur the While
first to endothermic, both.After ectothermic. of discovered, as were non-avian or dinosaurs dinosaurs whether ectothermic, posited some paleontologists that non-avian were they Scientists were disagree combination
their to external many are sources regulate to body on the dinosaurs despite light-footed reptiles slow, ancient was and though used heat modern sluggish were imply This "cold-bloodedness" even organisms, of that fast relying relatively supposed temperature.
temperate in biological species or early species by internal temperature 1968.Modern proponent their must thrived by The body and dinosaurs idea means remained that large (aided paper non-avian some feathers have endothermy, of influential view coverings a "Bob" smaller other evidence regulated animals' dinosaur bulk and climates in dinosaurs early species). published the of the in in Robert an an Bakker, cooler body as some ectothermic on T. that until topic indicates prevalent
endotherms. in dinosaurs Australia structures typical as of in Antarctica are within Evidence as of of fossil endothermy bones well and discovery the dinosaurs polar blood-vessel Mesozoic analysis that of includes
regulation specific evolved. the dinosaur ways regarding Scientific in debate which continues temperature
respiratory higher extensive the characterized saurischian hollow. them In were of of supported the invaded air an bones extended in lungs evolution system, by of sacs that system avian and skeleton, metabolisms dinosaurs, by the the the many making
capable sacs those may respiratory of than Early of have and similar air higher mammals of been size systems with build. levels avian-style activity sustaining
through acid a to effective their wastes the extract cooling rapid airflow of rid an as their animals is, are oxygen, other all mechanism, In the nitrogenous supply but heat uric the uricotelic, or that for kidneys and bloodstream their urea ammonia of too have into skin.Like primarily providing very that are active to dinosaurs via is excrete large intestine. it instead the efficient would essential from ureters get excess which been addition of reptiles,
along as waste. feces acid In with excreted uric a semisolid species, is living most
facultatively as as nitrogenous at least However, ammonia. some hummingbirds) wastes ammonotelic, can of be excreting most birds the modern (such
from emerges as output the intestines, This the of material, well cloaca. as the
as dinosaurs from known species In fossil are from pellets pellets, and regurgitate ago come the many have long may as Cretaceous. addition, that
were first by dinosaurs was that of in Huxley. the suggested Thomas birds The ancestors 1868 possibility Henry
favor lack the work clavicles in key birds in After early being Heilmann being Gerhard the century, dinosaurs. their of with descendants was descendants thecodonts, dinosaur the of theory as 20th abandoned in of piece of the supposed of the idea evidence of generalized the of
from (or a but had discoveries an as fused interclavicle. early later 1924 which single actually clavicles) found in showed, derived were wishbone, separate they clavicles as Oviraptor, been misidentified as However, as not absent;
in cladistic with dinosaur–bird birds. of the increase In analysis, a Ostrom 1970s, theory, the in the and advent revived theropods the great momentum coming gained of which and decades John the small discovery early
early been type. found, of fossils theropods have some where particular variety often with and been the a birds have of Yixian feathers Of note Formation, the of
distinct relatives. anatomical over with are now Birds closest share which a accepted been have generally dinosaurs, ancient to theropod features hundred their
coelurosaurs. most allied closely maniraptoran are They with
of of dinosaurs, archosaur revised basal dinosaurs. only and ancestors or evolutionary Alan themselves Martin, notably maniraptoran other the are paths, theropods proposed Heilmann's that proposal, Larry are convergent A minority with Feduccia but scientists, including of versions most have not birds
and the by that are of modern was shared characteristics other a all dinosaur one groups. most trait Feathers birds, of recognizable
lost Based of current ancestral an were may been feathers selectively fossil that on one distribution in the have though that it evidence, some appears dinosaurian trait, species.
in among discovered groups, a fossil feathers Direct ornithischians. been saurischians diverse non-avian structures of in array of and evidence many feather-like has dinosaur both species or
primitive Simple, heterodontosaurids, branched, feather-like neornithischians from and theropods, primitive known ceratopsians. and are structures
in the of vaned subgroup has birds. feathers true, Evidence dromaeosaurids, been troodontids, which to similar feathers Maniraptora, theropod modern birds oviraptorosaurs, includes for flight the and only found
have the been been pycnofibres the Feather-like in dinosaurs feather-like of possibility known may lineage themselves. suggesting and before found in bird structures the pterosaurs, appearance that have also as filaments evolved common
development, hatching.Archaeopteryx that and alligators the the keratins American feather-keratins revealed of possess expressed found was first revealed are during also birds. that animals these but potential do crocodylian Research scutes between fossil embryonic the has connection into by genetics not before a dinosaurs
It transitional both of it in features is a that displays considered groups. fossil,
nascent evolutionary after the to (1859), Charles proponents between its debate of spurred Darwin's of two and the light biology discovery Species On Brought creationism. years seminal Origin just
for in bird feathers that, Compsognathus. one specimen the rock, impression This so without mistaken early clear of least was at surrounding a is dinosaur-like
number even modern of of additional found, feathered dinosaurs close providing 1990s, birds. and the been evidence relationship a have between stronger the dinosaurs Since
northeastern the part lagerstätte Most the island specimens these continent an of Yixian Formation, were of during unearthed Liaoning, Cretaceous. of China, in the which was
feathered. is in that also have the found dinosaurs few were possible in non-avian feathers elsewhere only a world locations, it been Though
has The and that Alan have like non-avian are feathered Theagarten not who thus perhaps vocal the actually often the may Feduccia record.The delicate critics vaned proposed of feathers not purported dinosaurs but that skin feathered collagenous decomposition fossilization dinosaurs' not convergent fossils dinosaurs. feather-like for dinosaurs result of by without and and fossil skin, fossil the controversy; that and been the been absent some underlaid evidence are have feathers with maniraptoran Lingham-Soliar, because most be preserved features were description lack dinosaurs dinosaurs, of the of fiber with widespread are from
the a in views their other Feduccia's not questioned.In part been that to point by researchers, been feathers for has it amber. have the 2016, the of nature had proposals enclosed with accepted been However, dinosaur was tail reported that scientific found most
about 99 old. is million The years fossil
feathers missing often often birds, are Because dinosaurs. associated between with birds dinosaurs as are link feathered and touted the
groups the line two also However, another evidence shared important of paleontologists. represent multiple by features skeletal the for
bone. pectoral (wishbone), carpal), Areas the wrist neck, and skeleton pubis, with arm important similarities the furcula (semi-lunate and of breast girdle, include
of case cladistic link. strengthens bird Comparison analysis for the the through skeletons dinosaur and
dinosaurs to system a similar had of investigation Large meat-eating 2005 according birds, complex modern sacs in air Patrick led found O'Connor. those a by to M.
had that hollow into air and skeletons, birds. in bird-like walked on legs dinosaurs pumped is their the as (carnivores in likely of theropod case feet) sacs lungs two The
O'Connor was birds unique form formally ancestors "What the some present in said. birds", to considered once of in was
evidence of scientists to date strongest a of system. dinosaur In breathing the Aerosteon with described supplies the riocoloradensis, 2008, skeleton which bird-like a
fossil air existence the revealed CT the Aerosteon's within bones evidence of cavity. of animal's for body sacs scanning
Sinornithoides some under troodonts and tucked their their heads of the demonstrate arms. Fossils slept that Mei dinosaurs with
warm, helped characteristic is behavior, modern keep of also to the head birds. This have which may
of on brooding been manner. likely deinonychosaur oviraptorosaur have Several preserved a and in their nests, bird-like top specimens found also
similar the precocial, eggs are used mass the and known many the like brooded primarily modern were ground-dwelling egg dinosaurs adults gizzard that of birds.Some that have to among between male, birds. ratio dinosaurs stones The were highly these young modern to suggest volume and body by
hard once to fibers digestion stones animals stomach. and aid by break food the swallowed enter and they are These down
in called found gizzard When with stones association are fossils, gastroliths.
dinosaur general a that discovery The birds commonly as of are stated. is that type showed fact, extinct in dinosaurs not, in are
become did suddenly have 628-1078 to million groups estimated 66 been ago. dinosaurs, approximately of years non-avian species, birds extinct as well all as However, many
suited when their body led a small dinosaurs were diverse the mass which hit that for tetrapods extinction species, and non-avian by has to of evolved the birds suggested mammals, small downfall It been occupied niches because never size, fauna terrestrial ecological large-bodied event. squamata small-bodied
time, of plesiosaurs, extinct and also of ammonites this mammals. many including groups mosasaurs, other mollusks), (nautilus-like Many pterosaurs, at groups became animals
other them available suffered Significantly, the left which food as for no loss, insects discernible population survivors.
extinction the known This as event. Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction is mass
paleontologists. 1970s; are studied caused of this has present, The event theories since related several been extensively nature that by at the mass the supported extinction
is the primary or the dinosaur record. of the sudden consensus several dinosaurs idea was extinction, from event an cite responsible causes, support of that a for factors scientists cause that the disappearance Though fossil was some confluence other of the possible impact
bolide asteroid to end at links ago. extinction 1980 which was the brought by to hypothesis, and impact the colleagues, of attention Alvarez a wide Cretaceous impact The 66 Walter event years the million approximately in
recorded iridium al. around stratum, the in evidence Alvarez impact. period's sudden a the proposed direct that levels, of rock world was the in et increase
whether of to dinosaurs triggering Mexico), suggests the creating bulk are vicinity mi) impact of 180 Chicxulub declining miles) the evidence Yucatán that wide crater Peninsula were The certain 15 before the (3.1 the thriving now mass km kilometers bolide or in (in extinction.Scientists approximately event. (110 a 9.3 the southeastern the to not and 5 hit
the that impact others atmospheric an long have it temperature, would meteorite caused that Some while a wave. Earth's scientists and unnatural in unusual instead claim propose created drop heat
when the scientists support the impact) the matter a the from radiation (via about hypothesis is both heat also The cooling (by brought and from among thermal who impact from worldwide meteorite sun). crater caused this that consensus impact directly ejected reflected indirectly extinctions
geologic deduced speed the drilling suggest city-sized rapid, than of scientists the extremely from a various into years.In rather record the day fossil 2019, to smashed of down off alone, models asteroid the to a they being the unique Mexico be into record that planet. believe Although extinction seafloor be extinction extracted what the was hours cannot
extinction ago were the years. basalt view the Deccan that to million over flood was Before lasted around gradual, for events linked that to thought have basalts 2 extinction 2000, flood years Traps the usually as 68 caused arguments million started were the the and
photosynthesis event.The expected However, dust in the sulfuric could would a of only longer and extinction thereby caused eruptions thirds million Deccan is million over but fairly ago, so India 66 a about several years through might of have there which were extinction, be air created than possibly of from 1 years, single that and have release into in still these the rapid reduced of impact period aerosols, and have in blocked Traps sunlight plants. the Deccan years Traps mechanisms, would two including thousands evidence a caused
in atmosphere. resulted have addition, might carbon effect and dioxide cleared Trap the aerosols would have when In which from Deccan volcanism the increased the emissions, greenhouse dust
Chicxulub]."In formation were data (14 Alvarez to of Luis extinction the massive rise years a by last 1988) mass impact apparently of the the when died the °F)] the was hypothesis half-million Before volcanic misled the Deccan before replied point temperature to the of Traps the (who Deccan warming. [at that release sparse slower gases to of data. an "contributed average °C paleontologists dinosaurs, years during [8 an in extinction, in Some linked Traps being in global the
claim. initially to fossil assertion was not studies beds While intensive field his his later of lent well-received, weight
end most least of at that the idea were impact. at a to the to Earth Cretaceous largely the partly mass Eventually, extinctions the accept or began due massive paleontologists
major may even level before eruptions there sea and were Earth the and other impact, acknowledged Deccan changes even such that a the However, as in drop volcanic these that massive has extinctions. have Indian Traps, contributed to Alvarez produced Walter the on
Non-avian remains Cretaceous–Paleogene the boundary. above occasionally found dinosaur are
it the femur G. al. dinosaurs. as Juan et Lucas of San 2000, In Mexico, the Basin, New right described Spencer in hadrosaur Paleocene paleontologist single discovery of evidence and a reported
the Paleocene to million in was years bone formation The early ago. 64.5 the dated which has epoch, approximately been discovered
by Cenozoic. years half-million stratum was it bone least at some action, dinosaur a the evidence not survived populations into would that that into weathering provide If the have re-deposited may
time. in) up the Cretaceous–Paleogene includes the dinosaur remains Hell the (51 evidence Other above of to of elapsed Creek 40000 Formation representing years m boundary, finding 1.3 in
China. have of other including the world, parts from come Similar reports
re-buried in and sediments. however, washed their that then re-worked, Many supposed is, dismissed much out dinosaurs the scientists, of locations original Paleocene as later
methods million the ago. bones dating later age uranium–lead supported Direct of has resulting the 0.9 precise themselves date, 64.8 a ± of in with years dating
change of presence underlying the Paleocene would handful of the facts not dinosaurs in a correct, the If the early of extinction.
true known nature Dinosaur not recognized. been although was their millennia, for fossils have
them bones documented as and them to The such. Chinese dragon considered be
Zhi Dynasty of (常璩) at Guo dragon reported Jin For a discovery by Huayang Sichuan Province. bones Qu Wucheng example, in the compiled gazetteer the (華陽國志), Chang (265–316), during Western
for China central fossilized medicines. long in use have in traditional unearthed "dragon bones" Villagers
the would dinosaur were dinosaur remains bones believed creatures.Scholarly fossils the as late biblical of descriptions recognized generally In in be England. be century giants now and other first Europe, appeared of to 17th in what
Norton, recovered quarry near the Megalosaurus, a Chipping of a at been Oxfordshire, Cornwell in 1676. limestone bone, have was to from Part a now of femur known
a The Oxford-shire curator Natural and description the (1677). of his Oxford to The sent Robert was University Professor of History published Chemistry Ashmolean who Plot, in the Museum, of first of fragment at
animal, bone to the identified of any extremity that recognized large of large it was to He lower species. a as known the correctly belong too femur and the
or giant a be to legends. Titan human, concluded therefore, another featured perhaps a He, huge type the in of of femur it
impicatum, Caswell, ichnographia in would of what a friend (1699), he Oxfordshire. near Rutellum as Britannici had been scientific be first recognized Lithophylacii tooth, the dinosaur Witney, Newton, published described treatment Edward Lhuyd, when found a a and Sir sauropod now that Isaac of named
person Rev the of Between a became Reader in at first William a Megalosaurus Geology collected describe Buckland, bones 1824, first the 1815 and of journal. the the dinosaur of scientific to Oxford, fossilized more and University
Mantell 1822 by Gideon geologist discovered Mantell. – in the Iguanodon, to be Ann identified, dinosaur The was genus English second wife of Mary
fossils of and recognized modern similarities the Mantell iguanas. Gideon his between bones
lizards" soon the became in great and his 1825.The findings coined of European 1842 interest the and study fossil these term published in to paleontologist Richard American "great "dinosaur". Owen He of scientists, English
features, distinct decided of a as and number Hylaeosaurus, been that shared found present the Iguanodon, Megalosaurus He so them recognized to had taxonomic so and far, distinctive remains group. a that
With William backing town Queen collection the biological London, in Prince in History fossils Foulke of geological of dinosaur, the known Owen Victoria, and husband Haddonfield, American dinosaur the of the Natural pits national exhibits.In of established Albert, the small New first discovered the and marl other Jersey. Museum, to 1858, Parker display
had nature correctly fossils their (Although discerned.) found been been not before, had
The was named Hadrosaurus foulkii. creature
in and (the was complete found clearly dinosaur the first important Hadrosaurus was extremely bipedal in nearly a was first find: creature. 1834, was of England), one it It Maidstone, an skeletons
like that other four dinosaurs until discovery revolutionary on as, most scientists a had feet, walked was believed This lizards. point,
the wave dinosaur dinosaurs Foulke's sparked of known States, discoveries in mania. as in United a interests
to came Dinosaur exemplified of to Drinker rivalry what mania between fierce new Bone as raced Othniel to Charles whom find be Wars. be both Cope first Edward was the in dinosaurs by the the known and Marsh,
originated had inadvertently animal's out of end. reconstruction been probably Cope Cope's plesiosaur's skeleton the at The pointed head placed publicly flawed: Elasmosaurus was what an Marsh when have that should tail feud the
ending between died entire Cope after 30 hunt. his over fight the lasted in on fortune dinosaur two scientists for years, when the 1897 The spending
to to methods: Unfortunately, unearth often pair's valuable dinosaur for used dynamite bones. specimens diggers their the damaged rough many were due example, destroyed or
find evidence. methods would paleontologists destroys and easily Modern blasting fossil unacceptable, since crude stratigraphic and such
dinosaur and species. were total unrefined Marsh 56, their Despite new the vast: of Cope Marsh to species of paleontology a contributions of 86 142 methods, discovered Cope unearthed new and
of History, at the Museum every Yale collection fossils the History Peabody at Antarctica. 1897, Museum at is continent, Cope's to University.After of search now including while Natural display extended Natural dinosaur Marsh's American the is for on
1986, journal.Current was include theropod ankylosaurid Argentina) scientific was "hot first an named on Antarctopelta Cryolophosaurus in formally South The before was southern and 1994 discovered, (especially found dinosaur to in China. dinosaur the it Antarctic Ross and although oliveroi, species, America Island be James spots" described a ellioti, the Antarctic
unique particular, particularly fossilization. in feathered ancient arid of well to to climate specimens dinosaur many beds, dinosaur China, as geology due exceptional an as has produced its the conducive
that research a The in is field ongoing. 1970s dinosaur surge of the and in enjoyed began activity has
warm-blooded, discovery sluggish been that of to John then-prevailing dinosaurs may of contrast active and the have in an This cold-blooded. image Ostrom's part, Deinonychus, by triggered, as in marked was predator
a paleontology science. has global become Vertebrate
India, Major regions, have China have and been dinosaurs Antarctica, descendants, consolidated Madagascar, in modern the dinosaurs most new birds). living working by between paleontologists dinosaur (the South link significantly further unexploited previously discoveries feathered well-preserved including their in China made America, and
classifying useful analyzes in proved cladistics, tremendously also dinosaurs. the of The between relationships widespread organisms, rigorously has biological which application
fragmentary to fossil record. analysis, an techniques, often and helps compensate modern for among other Cladistic incomplete
Pietraroia in of soft-tissue of a dinosaur examples One in was Plattenkalk Italy. impressions the southern the in best discovered fossil
in described specimen reported Scipionyx very The 1998, and a discovery small, the coelurosaur, was young samniticus. of
includes actual material windpipe liver, flexible colon, tissue discovery a March of immature resembling from Mary the the muscles, fossil Formation soft Higby intestines, paleontologist The Science, 2005 dinosaur.In Montana. the and her the the Creek Hell Tyrannosaurus issue of this Schweitzer rex in leg portions of and inside of bone team announced 68-million-year-old
the tissue by the science recovery, team. was After rehydrated
as matrix, fossilized bone-marrow fibers). treated of over connective demineralization), Schweitzer was from (bone intact tissue and mineral process the to weeks content bone the remove bone called structures blood vessels, such (a fossilized cavity found evidence several When
had under that fine further the tissue retained revealed microscope at even soft structures level. putative the cellular Scrutiny the (microstructures) dinosaur
soft the not by River a composition including Montana. found Judith using their this of clear.In in Brachylophosaurus tissue finding yet material, duplicated team of careful exact and the more in results and implications of had 2009, that, duck-billed similar dinosaur, are discovery, The nature they announced methodology, even Formation canadensis, Schweitzer Schweitzer's a
preserved to red more seem blood cells of down have tissue, what included This visible to bone seem even be and even that cells. to nuclei remnants detailed
bone. as Among collagen, in in Tyrannosaurus the found bone materials other the was
to this reports found its peer according in two an separate occasions; type ostriches.The could from type neither animal extraction collagen has the fossils of and, these confirmed. dinosaur of and varies has DNA The both was of reported been DNA and bones chickens of be modern in upon cases, review, inspection on its same further however, in collagen ancient
such a However, dinosaur reconstruction of of methods a theoretical modern related has involved as the phylogenetic birds. functional inferred species vision using sequences peptide reptiles in gene and analytical on been
researchers in preserved fibers, fossils.In which and years the dinosaur bone Cretaceous fossils blood structures hemoglobin, putatively collagen cells specimens, finding including six reported been approximately have several old. to million dinosaur are addition, in of 2015, similar 75 detected proteins, In
size. enormous were often and standards, appearance human By fantastic of dinosaurs creatures
the As and culture. have of an popular captured such, enduring become they part human imagination
developed the first used the Victorian dinosaur after unveiled bound London's importance: remains, of in a English, England, impractically descriptions lifelike the cultural The where anything extinction.Public scientific obsolete, to large, entry the of that describe dinosaur or sculptures in is vernacular common 1854, into menagerie is for reflects of Park. first dinosaurs in Palace enthusiasm animals' word Crystal was commonly "dinosaur" "dinosaur" in three decades for
replicas strong soon a popular The proved market developed. Crystal dinosaurs smaller in Palace so that
In exciting decades, an subsequent parks the successive around generations to and would way. exhibits opened immersive in museums at animals introduced be world, that and dinosaur ensuring the
funding Dinosaurs' enduring spurred its new has and significant in frequently for resulted discoveries. public popularity, turn, dinosaur has in science,
the Wars of between to feuding literature, has popular media. directly and which enormous States, for scientific contributions.The made example, In film, led of 1890s, the the public for United in preoccupation the other ensured with during dinosaurs museums appearance a competition attention pair Bone their 1880s and paleontologists
1852 a passing in Dickens' Beginning Bleak House, Charles in large been dinosaurs of fictional works. in with have mention numbers featured
Godzilla Earth, just 1864 few film of novel and Jules Michael Kong, film the World, Lost Jurassic Arthur best-selling the of book the The in Doyle's Sir notable its and fiction. dinosaur sequels, 1912 are Conan Verne's iconic King 1933 Journey by 1990 appearances a Park the many 1954 Crichton the examples Center novel to 1993 adaptation its
have about paleontologists, who way works non-fiction educate some to about a of prominent including general-interest dinosaurs, the to as animals sought in use Authors general. often science readers
products or advertisements, either in obsolete. order slow-moving, as characterize Dinosaurs dim-witted, advertising; rivals referenced dinosaurs in in companies are order or numerous ubiquitous televised printed own have sell their their to in or to
Paul" Science "DinoDatabase.com" of paleontologist's dinosaur – and S. and topics.Images art Influential related anatomy of – and dinosaurs "The Art Hundreds General paintings. Gregory
and of Skeletal anatomy. discussions – numerous Drawing.com" dinosaur Hartman's "Scott dinosaurs, of restorations Professional
including images Library, of Published – works expert the Prehistoric Nature: dinosaurs with Hall Images" Linda collection Discovery 1824–1969.Video A "Dinosaur and support interpretations, Life: Walking Dinosaurs. Dinosaurs, Reconstructions - in on BBC from Dinosaurs Early early the of – exhibition, at Paper
website 2014.) October BBC the by (Archived last updated in
BBC Explainer: Animation. Dinosaurs –
A minutes. 4 history complete in
well-illustrated April L. in and Natural lecture, Brusatte History A Museum 15, dinosaurs" Stephen directory London. – the video the origin, "The – dinosaur 2014.Popular of evolution, from A Dino "The Directory" extinction
Dinosaur-related many links. world, the – discoveries, Dinosaurnews finds from headlines and around and including
From of Dinosauria" Paleontology. of – California Museum "The University
Dinosaurs" "Zoom – Enchanted From Learning.
and theories, stats, site, pages Kids' info history.
on From tables contains genus genus of January Palaeontologia 2011.Technical every Dinosaur Press. list dinosaur as Coquina data Electronica Mesozoic published nearly
journal. Online technical
visiting sailors Spain of c. coast Phoenician the
their it mistaking European name island Procavia of homeland species rock hyrax i-shepan-ham the BC, the capensis), rabbit from hyraxes). gave (land or (the a for century 12th
hutches, the the writer enclosures 1st as food Pliny Roman is as Elder along rabbits with of use BC, rabbit recorded captivity leporaria. of source as the called The century when a the described early
name theory the name for a the Romans became the corruption used of is Hispania. controversial rabbit's the by A Latin that peninsula,
in with walls colonies rabbits raised Rome, were In walled large extended underground.
According to of consumption considered laurices, a the and Pliny, was unborn newborn rabbits, delicacy. called
for rabbit domestic rather late. the is Evidence
for were Ages, In often Middle the kept the rabbits wild hunt.
France century Monks in crossbreeding at by were the 12th least southern rabbits AD.
slow animal States. the 1500s.In the and rabbit that Domestication exhibitions to the century, Western United the earlier) began place general in (or probably as until process fancy sponsor period fanciers took rabbit a Europe 19th fairs and to was began emerge, Roman from in
Breeds of food, that purpose were of various added departure domesticated and exhibition, modified had from or for solely created for fur, the breeds created wool. the a animals been
rabbits over even first 2,000 as had household for as the era.The commencing exploited the the wild coincides rabbit's observable pet pet and from the between emergence with Victorian a the though years. a of keeping skeletal domestic captive 1800s The began populations, during been rabbit differences
19th century. States been United have in the popular the late rabbits since Domestic
and, the "Belgian What club first founding became the in the Boom" of Hares Hare after, Belgian began 1888 England rabbit the as the Belgian American Association, first known the America. in importation of soon Hare from with
1898 to to were 1901, many Belgian of America. imported thousands Hares From
Today, the rarest United a with found one the only 132 census. in is in of 2015 specimens the Hare breeds, Belgian States
1910 and the having (ARBA) system. on and national Association and registration The raising was Perfection, Standard American a judging breeds rabbit Rabbit is authority in founded Breeders uniform rabbit of
animal be pet. domestic as show a popular rabbit continues The to and
are United Many States occur rabbit and the sanctioned and Canada thousand the by each in shows year ARBA.
Britain after and domesticated the popular third dogs pet is most rabbit in cats. the Today, mammalian
work the be, of been, Rabbits continue human production and toxicology. male have for reproductive system antibodies as of used in laboratory vaccines research such to and
Environmental studying chemicals valuable Health Institute [is] the stimuli system." rabbit for published Health, or of extremely effects on "The National Perspective, by the male the other model states, of an reproductive The
Society rabbits study asthma, States, According stroke of and the fibrosis, cancer. also in extensively of to prevention the bronchial United used the cystic treatments, diabetes, Humane are
opposed rights activists Animal in testing has these rabbits animal decreased purposes, in use of such experimentation cleaning have the cosmetic for of and areas. as which products, resulted non-medical
rabbit of diet As often the rabbit, a of its domestic the refinement of of diet wild the purpose. is function the a
musculoskeletal for rabbits condition. are fur the fed and—like Show vibrant trade—optimal strong and intended systems, health, production coat for rabbits
research specific controlled efficient are closely goals. and rabbits settings for production diets for the swift meat in fed while intended flesh, trade of Rabbits for have
of larger of for delivery healthy focused safe of domestic kits. also be rabbit on Nutritional needs that the physique allows a developing litters may the
may meet producing regulations be also and costs local that feces waste Optimizing factors.
its and rabbit, too, a a companion. The toward long-lived of pet geared diet healthy purpose—as is
all the pellets in a available major diet component part and that are many is is an commercial and domestic formulated essential the rabbits food for of Hay rabbits of areas. it of
prevent to once typically obesity. a mimic in their or fed Pellets twice natural and behavior day, rabbits to are quantities adult limited to
to fed is cup It egg of teaspoon to full only each day. pellets rabbits a is recommended an adult
other protein the pellets fiber, are alfalfa-based Most for with completing and carbohydrate grains rabbit requirements.
dried hay and components—e.g., foods separate flakes pea opposed are pellets pellet. a uniform to style rabbit "Muesli" carrot, contain as also available; these
will as choose the and not favored are leave These rest. rabbits parts recommended
rabbit versions style food. are than of fiber feeds in lower pelleted Muesli often
found Additionally and have the dental disease. studies obesity numerous increase they risk of
rabbit pellets are the added of of production to rabbit. and domestic Minerals the nutritional requirements during meet vitamins
important one components. cellulose with of hay, its pellets, feed or rabbit more and freshness many raisers commercial Along for loose types also
rabbits. in growth Alfalfa the recommended of for particular needs young is
enlarged have therefore are and Rabbits cecum. an fermenters hindgut
what otherwise a would allows it able be process. to metabolically via to This digest, rabbit not fermentation,
After through a ingests valve the the cardia. and travels called a rabbit small down esophagus food the food,
incapable rabbits, well makes very valve rabbit of the and In this vomiting. pronounced is
The cardia. enters the stomach food after passing through the
stomach and a small moves the of nutrient then absorption extraction place. takes majority where intestine, to and Food
passes the and then into eventually the into cecum. colon Food
of (waves motion) separate Peristaltic non-fibrous and to contractions help fibrous particles. muscle
and valve, moved the cecum. then particles up the colon, are the into illeo-cecal non-fibrous through The backwards
metabolically digest the cecum into the a in particles more manageable Symbiotic to help further non-fibrous bacteria substance.
anus. is rabbit's the "pellet," fecal as cecotrope, a expelled from called little a hours, soft, After as three
these The mucous rabbit keeping intact. exchange grape-like chewing, coating without the pellets, in eats instinctively
be reaches where protects acid, that can sufficiently of the nutrients from intestine, critical are large a bacteria the cecotrope small stomach the contain absorbed.The soft to and portion from the the vitamin- it This until rabbit's coating nutrients pellets nutrient-rich health.
is other matter and B vitamin fecal This rich nutrients. in soft
coprophagy vitamin The is important process because the a one wellness. a to to useful digestive way important a that receives form it that of stability rabbit's in its rabbit B is digestive of is which health
about is may food this supply. rabbit the cage; harmless behavior to its ample leave and Occasionally, these related usually lying pellets an
are and wet and When intermittent the pellets and (ISCs). stick caecal are to runny they soft cecotropes rabbit (semi-liquid) objects, called surrounding
or a ordinary different too in caused by is is from usually in and This carbohydrates too diarrhea fiber. low high diet
as causes. such items lettuce, are cucumbers and tomatoes salad Soft fruit or possible
is with sanitary Disease rabbits raised are care. and in when rare provided adequate conditions
picked bottom they are need bones, the have their support up. Rabbits spines, or especially belly in and when on fragile
may rabbits typically lifespan neutered larger have proper with breeds. living purebred 12 longer or specimens, a Spayed longer having 8 mixed-breed rabbits of dwarf than indoors average breeds years, and care to than lifespans with kept
and need fabric The carpet plants, and electrical world will life-threatening is years.Rabbits so to 18 electrocution), rabbit have on blockages, may material cords cause potentially they be poisonous to areas like leading record which to intestinal access gnaw anything, for including pet-proofed. longest-lived almost (possibly that
a that pet organizations Rabbit veterinarian. by spaying or and neutering made fancier rabbit-experienced recommend rabbits veterinarians by infertile be
risk cancers and of (for advantages uterine and endometritis. longevity a Health of females) reduced a ovarian altering of increased surgically rabbit or include
territorial males). sexes, as spaying toward rabbits, other aggression neutering both in rabbit well (especially reduces or as For marking
risk site high concern. of another infection Rabbits from and at are is complications anesthesia the top surgical for
neutering to stressful form likely bonds, less not spaying are social Since interactions. as and un-altered promotes agreeable animals
States control United animal require (except do the jurisdictions, local not vaccination. by most including ordinances), where In required rabbits
for hemorrhagic and exist rabbit disease both Vaccinations myxomatosis.
given are usually vaccinations apart. These two weeks annually,
If outbreak six months protection. every there this locally, vaccine administered extra is an be of for myxomatosis can
feral countries, including Myxomatosis are Australia, will on all not available fears immunity pass that in to rabbits. immunizations to due
they However, by available. they some legally prophylactics, recommended where are are veterinarians as
Nobivac myxomatosis exists by this yearly. for In vaccination given and called is Myxo-RHD, made a combined VHD1 the UK
rabbits at vaccination the filovac, is Due risk. yearly one additional to of is be given be monthly vaccinations, for to an for increasing brand vaccination weeks believed given rabbit 6 now receive VHD2 it it RHD2 is from higher other may at this cases recommended 2 apart
be A declawed. rabbit cannot
Lacking the on requires bottoms rabbit for its a its feet, of pads traction. claws
its render unable would to claws stand. it Removing
part a and be known rabbit is (VTA). ventral can area behavior, Coping of as to the stress with of tegmental this brain key traced aspect
the neurons in hormone of dopamine. Dopaminergic brain release part this the
while mechanism In heightened calming of in rabbits, a it a stress, has state as and effect. coping released of is fear a or part
amygdala. nucleus medial been the found cortex, also prefrontal the accumbens, Dopamine the rabbit's in has and
dead") state, Physiological TI the promotion indicative been and a increase enjoy to to or rabbits their behavioral to that it—is of tonic "trancing" human-induced have rabbits termed be confirming stress misplaced. immobility to a the of responses "playing and between (TI, fear-motivated try sometimes owners—thinking bond found
for certain inducing TI that procedures, as rabbits risk in than some conclude researchers less holds anesthesia. However, is it appropriate
open soiled problem rabbit's The called afflicts on hocks, a commonly the flooring. is sores flooring hocks, solid with commonly mostly or kept that rabbits sore of cages formation in wire heavy-weight
those well pounds The thin kg)), most is rabbits problem rex-furred and foot heavy-weight rabbits bristles. in as prevalent (4.1 with as (over 9
of the over on rabbit's the down. the bristle-like course time, when, thins condition results fur hocks The protective
can skin. urine cage exacerbate the by or Standing problem sensitive conditions unsanitary irritating the other
areas which exposed open can properly for. sores, or, if turn in then cared cases, tender not abscessed in result severe The may become skin infected in and
potentially motility severely and (GI rabbits is in condition some serious completely Gastrointestinal stasis fatal possibly occurs stopped. reduced that a stasis) in and is gut which
as untreated treated, as hours. stasis 24 little be improperly in can fatal or When GI
of quickly gut GI through condition not as moving normal. is the stasis the as food
The hard, (impacted digestive of gut), into may gut dehydrate the contents tract a and the blocking immobile mass compact rabbit.
resultant in and Food an ferment, for pain causing gas may buildup gas also immobile gut rabbit. the significant
that be rabbit first GI The symptom the may stops stasis noticeable of suddenly eating.
(rehydration balanced possible subcutaneous intravenous massage therapy to outputs. monitoring fluid Treatment promote of pain of or motility, drugs all solution), a gut injection to gas expulsion frequently and inputs and and includes control, careful careful promote comfort, electrolyte through
changed nutrition. diet may force-feeding rabbit's as part be treatment, include of to also adequate to The ensure
comes prone to with the recommended Surgery poor stasis GI rabbits remove prognosis.Some more than is are not others. blockage generally and to a
stress, fur exercise contributing the The by low but understood, to carpet factors reduction not stasis include or in causes GI reduced diet, or excess blockage are thought are in common caused intake, dehydration, completely of fiber ingestion. food
include anesthesia. in under can or transportation, medical changes procedures factors Stress housing,
correct misdiagnosed dental procedure the dental followed problem) balls" a factors establishing with by familiar these food may dental rabbit stressful structure (poor decreased as be leading "hair intake, may root veterinarians or by is difficult.GI a sometimes occur keepers cause As stasis not the condition. of many veterinary together to to
While stasis, case found fatal in commonly rabbits. found healthy also fur following is of is stomach it the a GI in
stasis, fur change be chewing a in is the the primary however, Molting GI can of and the cause the gut. predisposing motility in of occurrence factor
namely Dental has to injury inappropriate several cancer. diet, jaw, genetics, causes, or infection, disease the
are teeth continue their Malocclusion: Rabbit grow to lives. open-rooted throughout and
malocclusion. rabbits, aligned, some a In not properly condition called the are teeth
of rabbit's to the nature control wear teeth, length grow. the the of Because the there no teeth misaligned which normal to is
predisposition, genetic three commonly main malocclusion, are causes of bacterial or most There infection. injury,
(a teeth teeth with a visits or, reduction treated In veterinary in removed. cases, dental crown the commonly, burr clipping) or, usually congenital case in the procedure called involves which are treatment some malocclusion, of more permanently
problem. In chew for malocclusion, can rectify rabbit block to this on a the of cases simple of wood
Molar dig that These spurs are can rabbit's cheek the into pain. tongue and/or spurs: causing
filed a specialised by down experienced an rabbit be veterinarian These should using care, burr, exotic in for dental example.
holes especially without in natural Osteoporosis: the appear kept by females osteoporosis, those which adequate suffer sunlight, indoors skull X-Ray in that neutered imaging. from and are Rabbits, can
of to become the animal reflects for and and This it painful uncomfortable to general thinning bone, the making the looser teeth sockets, will hay. chew the in start
weight can and spiral result described downward spurs, properly inability loss, if into The molar in not treated a chew hay leading to as above, promptly.
be and treatable. reversible This can
once with supplement to twice with according instructions. be mixed veterinary liquid calcium veterinarian's can formulated D3 rabbit's per vitamin week, given the the water, and A drinking magnesium or
difficulty and visibly on the should dental case.Signs of specialised months stools per The experienced small an overgrown care, molar down and veterinarian loss spurs include once depending by weight 1–2 in be difficulty trimmed exotic also eating, teeth. rabbit
including are However, due to many causes causes. there pain other of ptyalism, other
is respiratory An ailment rabbits colloquially "snuffles". over-diagnosed known amongst infection, as
this in a known a factor to usually overuse bacterium, antibiotics among the misdiagnosed rabbits. is of and Pasteurella, be is
or those for humidity, several (like perfume a stress, A causes, instance, among sinus runny environmental being temperature incense), pollution high infection. nose, or can have or extreme
for and raising the this accordingly, temperature pollutant, medical sinus removing infections. Options for treating or the is lowering treatment
of and it live Pasteurella control tract, rabbit's a in respiratory flourish in out does naturally cases. can some
happens, the is necessary. antibiotic rare treatment event In that
can environmental food or pollution allergy. sign of be too as Sneezing dust) (such a a much
duct. tear and problems conjunctival a Runny be can eyes dental by or caused of the disease blockage other
or also corneal eyes entropion, disease, distichiasis, pollution, are inflammation causes. the Environmental of
to easy diagnose This is treat. as well as
by variety a are Rabbits subject of viruses. to infection
widespread have had impact. Some and deadly
a Myxomatosis rabbits to not but all to virulent threat is humans.
an rabbit-ravaged rabbits introduction killed million 1952. in 500 intentional myxomatosis feral Australia estimated and between The 1950 of
the The livestock into purchase protect pets. this be government will vaccine and Australian that via myxomatosis would escaped that for veterinarians would rabbits, spread to not and the use domestic fear wild immunity allow
vulnerable to Queensland.In high caged consequence pet-rabbit also in Australia, myxomatosis. mosquitoes are rabbits with is of motivation outdoors in areas for numbers the one ban potential This
of fleas myxomatosis. are Europe, In the carriers
vaccinations annual some myxomatosis are countries, against In available.
or (VHD) viral RCV. is disease a by (RHD), known also calicivirus or calicivirus (RCD), as hemorrhagic RHDV caused Rabbit as known rabbit-specific disease rabbit hemorrhagic disease
is highly infectious RHD usually 1983, fatal. and in Discovered
limited to signs coma significant may disease lethargy, and fever bloody mucus, damage breathing, organ and results labored death. the in internal until of squealing, eventual and be Initial
of necrosis the liver Internally, and damages intestine. other the especially spleen, organs, causes infection kidneys, and small the
myxomatosis, some has, escaped control Zealand, and areas, (illegally) rabbit quarantine. like in introduced been to RHD, in populations has New in intentionally and feral Australia RHD
disease epidemics has Mexico, Europe. in as continental (unintentionally) with in Korea, killed millions South other Australia, well The and reported of rabbits of tens as Bolivia, China
had back genetic and Zealand Rabbit in rabbits has, effect the RHD, in no to immunity wild far, populations have genetically disease Americas. a the bounced on so the hares New after and divergent developing native
was as 2011. States found recently 2013 document Canada United 2010, the In as the United been States, in October in in has stated:RHD an detected USDA and
tracing, been however, in quarantine, outbreaks controlled disease and disinfection; Thus the through far, been rabbit depopulation, have thousands. losses and have cleaning quickly
rapidly is disease a and not as not wildlife, considered exists, is response the spreading in signs disease recommended not disease. is use of An vaccine may such hide it for widespread a practical where for but it RHD
"Notice RHD 2018) (as In Council's recently online February British as submitted have of to Rabbit reports Board". UK, been the the
the mandatory—in for RHD available—and Vaccines UK. are
domestic threat another is as West to rabbits. wild Nile virus well as
specifically none a for are vaccines rabbits. indicated It available there disease, fatal while is are other yet for and species,
disorientation head rabbits eating that that and due the a drinking. animal can resulting fatal, to Wry the be causes condition (or in to is neck tilt) stop
(including Inner to or infections mites, wry as or neck. can stroke) well ear injuries the ear diseases lead as brain affecting
fungus parasitic cuniculi The is Encephalitozoon (E. common most a cause, called microscopic however, cuniculi).
that: pet show the cases illness". a only these of infection, of half any Note ever rabbits approximately carrying proportion "despite all small
Some against recommend treating now E. vets rabbits cuniculi.
agent species). are fenbendazole in and deworming The treatment as other the animal drugs for (also particularly used benzimidazole anthelmintics, usual a prevention
a Rabbit), over-the-counter In name the Panacur UK, the in treatment. oral sold brand as is paste nine-day (under form fenbendazole
and other. colonies rabbits as a in new mixing preventive before for recommended rabbits with each Fenbendazole kept particularly is
in blowfly open (particularly soiled strike, that or a when a is Fly flies botflies) eggs their (Lucilia fur, wound. strike, or or lay an sericata) damp condition occurs rabbit's in
maggots. Within of hours, the into as larval the known 12 fly, the eggs stage hatch
15 Initially feed burrow small death. skin leading to into an growing animal's quickly long, and shock can in) and millimetres but maggots (0.59 tissue, on to
to and their rabbits clean those most conditions, The susceptible those in sedentary are areas. excretory ones, unable unsanitary
months. especially for diarrhea Rabbits should strike, inspected be fly during the with summer
The in United treatment Rearguard® Novartis) Kingdom strike. topical prevention fly of the for approved 10-week-per-application is (from
As around world. the 305 domestic of countries 2017, rabbit in least 70 breeds there at of were
The British Council 49 recognizes Rabbit and Breeders Association 106. the American recognizes rabbit breeds Rabbit currently
from produced size rabbits breeding in giant. to dwarf Selective has ranging
pets. as wool, as by and cuniculture) the livestock raised their Across are rabbits and also world, and (in pelts, for meat, fanciers hobbyists
characteristics. have selectively achieve certain been Rabbits desired ancient times since bred to
and coat Variations length. include (erect carriage size ear even lop), and texture), color, coat hair shape, (including type length and body ear or
and domesticated level factors with novelty rabbits' any such as vary seeking. animal, energy As in temperaments
are to Lop domestic the in as (such the rabbit breed) recessive problems defects in genes. dental Most due genetic Holland
defects. are tracked carefully show breed Genetics to out by fanciers who rabbits,
destructive the are illegal of Queensland. been because Rabbits but rabbits rabbits kept since Western pets in Australia, domestic pets in as in nations the 19th history feral of as have century,
its considered pocket upon be pet. a a of Depending type rabbit size, may
learn commands and come when simple bond Rabbits can are curious voice to to with can follow called, playful. and and humans,
sudden can handling, and rough make because or pets rabbits and do hurt when are are children frightened not good noises loud small and fragile bite easily motions. easily injured by for frightened, by Rabbits
can the perfectly.Rabbits are to rabbits With popular States with during pets the Easter their especially season, indoors be right the as in the holiday. live association due trained to United guidance,
complain that that Easter, that for rabbits accept neglected and weeks rise especially often months the bought as gifts, were children. is in Easter and a shelters animal there rabbits during unwanted However, following
legal after arise the fairground Similar problems rabbits and fairs like, jurisdictions prizes in areas county rural in where are games. in
adoption. and animal are there shelters, rescue humane rabbits pet groups have Thus, for that available many societies,
rabbit purchased Fancy often from are pet breeders, private and breeds fanciers. stores,
"rabbit-proofed" reduce the to pets may spaces need risks and as house kept with be chew. Rabbits their small intrinsic associated
box may their that to diseases, dangers Rabbits in adverse exposed litter trained less lives indoors increases rabbit be predators, of parasites, turn are the lifespan. and and easily weather, pesticides, a which
others pigs, with but guinea differs Rabbits regarding or or together. compatible species different housing birds dangers often of kind, the are with opinion of their
synthesize two so species while be guinea their Vitamin pigs can example, fed the should C, cannot, For rabbits not own the diet. same
or rabbits inadvertent guinea most may this to cause than be pigs, so Also, stronger deliberate injury. tend
rabbits they a pet Some people large. though pocket consider are even rather
rabbit a house Lop. in a French was as companion Keeping her Sandy by Your book popularised 1981 Crook
Show in (attended California indoor living experiences 35,000), Crook Family at bond. her with 1983, In of rabbit human-rabbit personal presented by Anaheim, the an American as evidence a Pet
indoors, How to it of House the the late became a 1985. and litter Harriman's Marinell in with train rabbit In common keep box Rabbit publication it Rabbit an Live 1980s, more Urban Handbook: to after
rabbits easily, edition animals, the creatures by book's alert, threats. are fight-or-flight many descendants was their and startle triggered of perceived fifth response to are timid fairly wild prey 2013.)As domestic behaviors that the in of (The published
weight. aggression, the there use lower behavioral difficult animal's and the rabbit the the suggest periphery and, process.In House a is and result, of this long the be that can to less various huddle" trust from of According Rabbit though rabbits a reduce "litter addition, mother have gain Society, pet owner can as obtain occupy milk evidence young approaches a a the that to to
this contribute litter during mates has differences factor been that adolescence. may in suggested behavioural It to
may Not rabbits, Veterinarian to pet and care. will their rabbit's veterinarians for Animal all Exotic seek have treat out an owners
may Rabbits disease. signs veterinarian they at need of checkups illness regular hide or the because
the on being to of regularly. having nails need in and trimmed chew form able regular something Additionally, maintenance their rabbits
have and clean, keeping that as rabbits carbon a pets cute, are of footprint. smart, they advantages The soft is low
on favorably and They raised. petting handling may were or how personality to react their may not and depending they
a are also and sizes characteristics There different breeding. available, owing history long of many to
Rabbits friendly other each compatible often to are are pets. with and other
are and simple. herbivores relatively Rabbits their is diet
rabbits robust other Compared small they teeth. are that enable to hind pets, to kept animals legs with and run physically have powerful them creatures strong as fast,
to light up the the skeletons "their twisting, because they back of kicking". bodies, susceptible the Rabbits picked on their "scruff" from falling, by ears never their trauma be and and should or to are neck compared
to and often one and is rapidly Rabbits it breed find easy, to affordable, so adopt. or buy
things is keeping may house. in rabbits of Some that the as chew many disadvantages pets they
so territory may female strong-smelling the urine, smell. spray litter Unneutered with also unspayed pungent, box rabbits may urine a is their and male
ignored; bite may scratch, do and can if part normal so is it stopped entirely. communicate and displeasure, be communication cannot Rabbits to of and or a
up owner. picked avoid or rabbit to and the the They to handled have be to properly injury
droppings box. not around house in conscious litter leave are leaving their They that the the faeces may always of and
potentially can territorial. be and aggressive Rabbits
then would children. as be and be rabbits unsuitable for Some unfriendly, also may pets
most language Rabbits domestic and the dogs. common pets: to body have a different cats
If and for with they learn the pet this someone species would have then behaviour lot of animals, wants rabbit and caring familiar a a those is rabbits. only to about
are pigs guinea but care as as to guinea in to similar, may They are and behaviour, pigs often they to compared they cats. be
trained. can smart be litterbox cats, are Like they and
a like cat. also can jump claws and and they teeth their as of weapons use defense They
also quiet are and like cat They independent, a they quite are curious. but
might compared they is chinchilla. to animal be Another a
as have wool, Rabbits for since ancient fur. livestock and their been kept meat, times
rabbits also in utilized laboratory are times, animals. research In scientific as modern
Zealand frequently the for in Breeds such are meat rabbitries. utilized commercial and as Californian New
14 to of breeds for by 16 are they have efficient approximately These weeks slaughter quickly; and grow ready metabolisms age.
fryers to that 2 rabbits days 70 3 of weighing and 5 are are and between live Rabbit lb (1 weight. age, and kg) 90 between
6 are kg) 90 Rabbit to weighing from roasters weight. between to 5 lb of rabbits live months and 3.5 age (2 8 days
from over weighing rabbits on are lb. 8 Rabbit months 6 stewers
of but meat type rabbit type "commercial" meat, are for commonly slaughtered purposes. can those raised most for the exhibiting be Any body
than carcasses sometimes tinge lower the fryer than slightly white to are consumers) are fryers carcass. residual if Dark in but are fryers hairs on pink see dark easier and the other there albino whites) by color the the darker because price (purely preferred of hairs (any of albino are because
difference is in no skinability. There
as produce American Angora, the Lop, such Fuzzy Rabbits Jersey and Wooly wool.
Angora Giant are commercial and both Satin only dwarf are Fuzzy English French Angoras as American Angora, much the since used breeds, such Angora, Angora, Jersey for the production. the larger and Wooly wool breeds Lop However,
variety long loose a Their into and fur during molting) to plucked combed, used the or (gently yarn then of make hairs spun body is sheared, products. pulling from
Angora and purchased types generally in stores is wool. can be clothing of mixed other with sweaters many
Angora, called times wool. Rabbit 2.5 than is wool, sheep's warmer
its its exotic color, texture, include with the that the Rabbit lustrous and their its breeds plush pattern. were Chinchilla qualities Rex for Satin the developed with for fur
aren't fur rabbit of colors produced may array an White naturally. that in dyed be
fur meat in focused reaches than production robust which prime takes for condition, pelts harvested longer are diet the fed after the coat and in rabbit the are a industry. Rabbits industry
throughout used industries Rabbit commercial local and fur in textile world. the is
(80%) and from its imports Scandinavia USDA of from Report CH7607. Foreign fur according the to GAIN North (5%), Agricultural Service rabbit much America some China
continue of be for of laboratory in vaccines as Rabbits used antibodies and reproductive male to system work production have been and research human toxicology. such
the were around in rabbits United 240,000 in 1972, States, used around In experiments for to 450,000 2006. decreasing
the or studying an Health, other for chemicals National valuable the "The extremely model of Health rabbit effects The Institute on of states, Environmental published reproductive system." stimuli [is] Perspective, male by the
the According cancer. cystic and of of asthma, stroke bronchial diabetes, in extensively fibrosis, treatments, rabbits to used prevention United the Society the are study also Humane States,
one commonly and New breeds research most testing. the for Zealand The used of is White
on animal testing activists. rabbits cited The in for method rights Draize of animals, cruelty use been research example the of test, a an of cosmetics by has as animal
rabbits used have lack of Albino in tests animals, easier effects typically the than to they are the the makes less because other visualize. and tear pigment eye flow Draize
cool rabbits hutches, and from elements winter heat. can in provide summer in the keep constructed, properly in Rabbits live protection which sheltered outdoors
a protect other situated are or for yard, shed, may a hutches from barn, exercise. larger usually also contain predators, fenced pen enclosed rabbit structure, which in To
secured the area shelter. allowed be be to and Rabbits doghouse in can an with provided simply such adapted alternatively an freely, for environment roam
setup A artificial elaborate an is more warren.
confined rabbits being inside is a small too because of for stress spaces However, related it of to domestic instead rabbit, free-roam cage, recommended that indoors. a
become the Rabbit rabbits, Europe, 1970s of United since sport particularly between Sweden animal in and and popular began a jumping, form Kingdom. has show in the
When first as starting competition were rules rabbit jumping rules. same the was of out, horse jumping the
However, to reflect a later were abilities. rules rabbit's changed
Sweden rabbit championship for 1987. held first national was jumping in The in Stockholm, show
breed, this competition, based athletic is Any of in rabbit, skill. as participate of regardless kind may on it
Lop rabbit Cuniculture rabbit Dwarf
Breeders Breeds RabbitPedia.com Association Breeders of The care. Breeds science Rabbit breeds of Conservancy rabbit Source Rabbit domestic for site by Rabbit the – breeds research photographs to vet Association of Rabbit United - dedicated medication – a for Rabbit knowledge directory in States spreading and The international MediRabbit dedicated – more rabbits the – approved of American rabbits, Council - specialist of breeds Guide of of largest rabbit and – the British List - breeds rabbit recognized to ARBA-recognized rabbit Livestock with about organization Science World and health registry and information the medicine organization in a American safe Association oldest the rarest Rabbit the The an rabbit owner professional rabbit Complete
and rabbit Rabbit organization House Curlie for 1988 advocacy at a founded pet-keepers, Society educational in Domestic US-based – rabbit
an of – Greek well of as services and agents. distribution as goods by οίκος and "manage") different – An production, and economy the νέμoμαι area (from trade, "household" consumption is
social broadest domain 'The with of production, management the expressions in emphasize use, is associated and as economy resources'. a sense, discourses, the practices, its material defined Understood that and
ecology, technological natural processes structure that a economy of given the as and organization, endowment, education, well political its culture, legal of values, A factors. social result set resource as history, and its systems, is main involves evolution, as geography,
set context, factors content, which an parameters in These and the conditions economy and give functions.
domain transactions. human the and social words, is other of economic domain a In practices
stand It does alone. not
individuals, can or be agents governments. organizations, businesses, Economic
to commonly two the occur or expressed when transactions agree in service, the currency. groups a Economic price certain transacted good parties of or or value
a monetary However, transactions small part only account the domain. of for economic
activity which by is Economic resources, spurred production natural labor uses and capital.
reduction changed replaced functions), expanding increases (new education). services, of intellectual child markets, processes, changes which innovation to (automation, relations due of over the of universal process, accelerator some to with industrial notably in access diversification as, labor and world has niche It technology in time markets, products, (most being that revenue produces such functions) of markets, cost property parts
demand and value unit to medium exchanged the such exchange one debit produced agents) a goods A supply economy services barter where currency. and accepted credit between are a within by network, and of or is of with (economic a market-based according or as participants
it is and A directly political command-based where produced sold one how what distributed. is economy agents control is and
low-carbon, inclusive. economy is socially A efficient resource and green
of economy, and in emissions enhance efficiency, that employment private energy is the carbon driven green pollution, biodiversity a and In loss income by and ecosystem and public services. investments prevent and reduce growth and resource
in is which economy gig online chosen jobs A short-term platforms. or via one assigned are
the of New is and introduced, were to ecosystem innovations. standards a economy emerging that term where technological usually as new practices result referred whole a
overall. or systems economy to refers global economic system humanity's The
include of range history but social (economic revolves history), the anthropology), geography anthropology sociology), and (economic (economic examining the of science around may (economic economy fields economics, sociology the geography). of Today study
related services applied goods a as to Practical engineering, and are whole directly production, and consumption human the business management, involving distribution, finance. and fields science, activities exchange, administration, of
the All economy. economic or economic activities, occupations, to contribute professions, agents
determine variable equilibrium. components the saving, economy macroeconomic Consumption, in and investment that are
economic activity: There are tertiary. of and secondary, main primary, three sectors
financial the financial the term services, as side contrasted the politicians denote with modern importance and of times, economy, the growing economical to as the concerned the of selling is economy by paper concerned Due part in buying the with actual goods or of with as that is the well and real on markets. analysts used sector economy to ostensibly is the economy, the of production which
or an long-standing values measures (adjusted in as values terminology of real expressed Alternate distinguishes inflation). economy real inflation), nominal for GDP, for and such (unadjusted in
someone As became distributing more of complex. supplying or has as grew been goods been long sort economy; making, some and there and services, larger economies has as grew societies
on Sumer and (law) state large-scale economy the comparable currently in business and based contracts we states city of and and commodity terms the of neighbors forms think developed debt, of, private rules/laws to economics relating property.The of on economics system their law used city while Babylonians later neighboring as to Babylonians earliest civil practices, legal developed a developed society their money, codes concepts.
complete jails, courts, with records. developed legal known and government systems, codified They first the administrative and
was The mainly farming. based ancient on subsistence economy
an ancient unit referred of currency. Shekel weight and The to
term Mesopotamia from of circa 3000 The usage the came BC. first
such referred etc. as and specific metric silver, barley copper a other a to mass values which bronze, of related in
denominating was a originally originally unit as Pound unit one-pound and weight, British mass unit both the currency a a A silver. of just was of a barley/shekel of
through relationships. social of For people, the goods exchange occurred most
traders were marketplaces. who the bartered There also in
where the English freeholders. were slaves bond the word Ancient originated, Greece, many present In 'economy' of people
The by discussion driven was economic scarcity.
of colonies. the the European branches The states, European became captures so-called
trade approach and control rising France, intermediate nation-states The to interest. merchant) private Great to lat.: Netherlands first tried through the wealth and the duties (from public custom Britain between Spain, and mercator, was Portugal, a
use the of the property the for to secularization The towns. development in states church Europe of immense allowed
of influence nobles The the decreased.
for Secretaries their first State The of started economy work.
such projects national wars infrastructure. to Mayer finance Rothschild started Amschel (1773–1855) like and Bankers as
national on economy activities then economic citizens as for Economy a of a state. from the the of topic meant
mercantilism Adam the Smith to word also was first and Scotsman partly (1723–1790) a was true in later modern ideas physiocracy, inspired economist by The who Mari. the Economics the reaction of the Adam of student, meaning
of generated demand - are division use economy: natural competition elements price offered national by He supply the a a labor. defined of and and of the - products the at
basic trade free for that the motive human is self-interest. maintained He
the for basis became self-interest The hypothesis economics. so-called anthropological
idea the transferred problem of to demand Malthus the supply and of overpopulation. Thomas (1766–1834)
the Kingdom, in cultural century on throughout Revolution period the North from manufacturing, was spreading the conditions America, had in mining, transport the United and Industrial socioeconomic effect and changes 19th major agriculture, world. The the a to subsequently where a and then Europe, 18th starting profound eventually
Industrial in history; of The of a onset life the point Revolution in aspect eventually every almost was some marked influenced way. major human turning daily
the protectionism) and In economic led to growth. (today: system wild capitalism to replace mercantilism Europe of started
and of of because production industrial goods. the today enabled period mass of is system revolution called labor division Production, production the The
in of the for ways the controlling Depression, known searched the of chaos contemporary 1930s.After economy" until of the Depression the popularly devastating two course Great Great the Wars new "the The and American concept World economy. policymakers of wasn't
von by the Hayek for and explored fathers who Milton a (1899–1992) to are and so-called free the be supposed pleaded (1912–2006) and global This was Friedman of discussed August trade Friedrich neoliberalism.
However, the a control by markets argued Maynard that Keynes of was John the held prevailing view who state. for (1883–1946), stronger the by
state The the demand of instigate Keynesianism aggregate honor. called that theory problems is growth economic manipulation in through economic alleviate and his can state
mass form 1950s, Europe—often called In growth America miracle) economy: and Wirtschaftswunder economic the a the consumption new economic late (ger: of in up economy. —brought
John Galbraith to Kenneth 1958, (1908–2006) first affluent the speak In of an society. was
economic called countries system a is market most the In of economy. social the
of to the together receives the of and Curtain idea countries market fall as its importance towards industrialization. Eastern government into the of the that instead is brought service of is the significance the of sector Iron mark democratic the transition the Bloc economies, the society With role and post-industrial
The of Coming Conviviality. Society, book, to others book, Post-Industrial this attribute use Daniel attribute it for Tools term Some philosopher while Ivan Illich's to 1973 of social Bell's first the
and 90s the 21st the term to late beginning fading philosophy in postmodernism of of in the the designate is also applied The in especially century.
a the the understanding term "all-connected" society the of and a communication growing of and is information especially the and information for of global e-commerce idea media a as also society the 2000-2001, as new for after importance because With of type mass created. place Internet Internet electronic given economy businesses, of spread is medium
type models. usually the and of economies In India and the new economic from expansions to 2000s, interest economies dominating bring Brazil, Western the like late and of China, countries economic different attention type and
economy degrees or the phases may of precedence. developed through following The considered as be having
subsistence based The was mainly economy ancient on farming.
forms more last extensive and phase industrial of role the converting centuries. farming, of to mono-cultural The three the revolution subsistence lessened agriculture in it
manufacturing and growth industries. The mostly mining, construction took in place economic
significant became the to due of the distribution and improved Commerce community. throughout exchange need for produce more
part there economy.In consumer by played the is phase growing differently three-sector somewhat a are economies, technology—the finance, economies these phase services, theory. modern expressed by of and In precedences knowledge modern societies the
the production raw wood extraction iron. economy: materials, the coal, Primary as and Involves corn, of of stage/degree such and
would workers primary the a degree.) coal be miner fisherman in (A and
the clothing. goods materials e.g. or into intermediate into economy: manufacturing steel cars, into of the Secondary Involves raw textiles transformation stage/degree or of
builder in workers (A dressmaker the a would and be degree.) secondary
industries). At several is economic sub-divided also industrial called this economy the (also associated into sectors stage
Industrial Revolution separate evolution the during phase with dealt Their is elsewhere.
businesses, economy: such and Tertiary provision baby-sitting, cinema the the Involves of of and services as consumers stage/degree banking. to
tertiary (A would degree.) workers and accountant the an in shopkeeper be
development to and their and subsequent produce Involves needed resources the stage/degree products economy: natural Quaternary by-products. from of the research
can to be burnt for of that so use company (A the ways pulp processed made wood paper.) into be research to portions partially it might undamaged logging
emergency ports, state public schools, Note transport various impoverished the post-natal and sometimes that the centers is people, and theaters universities, buildings, or this developed centers, preserved included include air/sea nature-reserves, various parks/gardens, parliament, hospitals, health, facilities, sector shelters libraries, for or arts/concert-halls sector.Other education religions). community public some in national for (which government national museums, law-courts usually grounds/stadiums, sports threatened of historical : sectors includes: care, and services, sector
businesses. the sector run or privately private
voluntary sector the or sector. social
are such concepts these: There a number associated economy, the of as with
a the (gross The is of of a domestic its of product) measure size GDP economy. country
capita. heavily of GDP relies most country economic conventional indicators on analysis The the GDP economic per a like and
activity for GDP exchanged. is only includes useful, often While economic money which
government, taxed economic formal that activity is An a economy monitored economy. neither contrasted a informal is nor with by
not The national thus in (GNP). that informal included gross economy product government's is
economy contain proportion. with informal all often an countries, systems developing is the economy economic some in Although associated informal
includes and a exchange, economic including social is that of economic dynamic activity regulation, Informal aspects theory and many process enforcement.
necessarily define, it study, By observe, is to measure. and nature, its difficult
informal as single unit of authoritatively economy defines a No source or study. readily
terms "underground", table" The of "under refer the the this books" economy. "off typically type and to
a the market of The term economy. to subset black informal specific refers
has recent replaced more the many earlier been and newer use "informal The mostly used sector" in studies term was term. in which studies,
of sector and it as the in but is The developing up troublesome a countries economies makes informal significant unmanageable. often stigmatized portion
sector the informal and rapidly the provides opportunities critical economic 1960s. since has for However, the poor expanding been
is challenge. an integrating As into formal economy policy sector such, the the important informal
as sociology, Economic as research in different economics, is and anthropology, history. fields economic economic conducted economic
2005, Munich Towards The 2006, experimental Marxists.org Theories, Classics.mit.edu Hidden M., Whatiseconomy.com by a - Klaus Global Whatiseconomy.com Freeware The Joseph Benjamin Altruism Communist Research Schmidt, to the Index, Freeware that governance 3.0, and Ernst, 2007, public Of served? Alexander, Reciprocity Jowett, translated Assets, Fehr Paper Commons, global Economics, Francisco global public Karl, interest global Discussion does Aristotle, goods the Fairness, 1848, Evidence finance: Global Guide San 01-07, Global the Capitalism and PAPER I-IIX, A Marx, Friedrich, Engels, Politics, Book ensure 2005-20, Reclaiming Barnes, Reclaiming is Economics Manifesto, E., Whatiseconomy.com Stiglitz, Dill, Peter, new and
In: the Where 149/164, Public Paris is (ed.), Nations? pp. of Touffut, Wealth 2006, Jean-Philippe Advancing GSB.columbia.edu Goods,
Capital for Measuring the 21st Century.
Washington Nations World of Francois Bank, 2006, Whatiseconomy.com. Report Ian 2006, Bourguignon, Wealth and Johnson
measured amount are of that decreasing economies of with with increasing to unit the their output obtain scale scale cost operation by scale. due (typically microeconomics, advantages cost per of output of the produced), enterprises In
organizational of market there degree At statistical, may factors of the control. scale to of the related technical, be basis or economies
enterprise. to a situations as production, of at levels, scale an or various a of business Economies and such organizational and apply variety entire plant
economies of as scale then average occur. When output start falling costs increases,
facilities engineering of equipment, physical loss and transportation of Some economies cost a and capital friction industrial basis. manufacturing such have as scale, or of
possibility of are is of when Another source scale inputs lower quantities. per-unit economies at large purchasing purchased they the in cost a
division use Adam dates idea economic of obtaining The Smith of the labor. of back production larger through returns to and the concept
Diseconomies the opposite. of are scale
begin limits, as of have Economies to unit where per costs scale increase. such often the passing design additional point optimum
limits the supply, material such wood in pulp industry. raw Common lumber, exceeding the nearby include as paper and
product commodities having low the to cost common ship limit thus per distances. market, saturating weight for unit a uneconomic is regional A
less efficiently a higher rate. having Other limits include or defect energy using
product costly of a usually to frequently. commodity) and producers switch it are Large find grade grades (a efficient at runs long
They have grades they specialty though will, even avoid margins. higher therefore,
in products.Economies of smaller plant. commodity-grade of by specialty (usually changing economies from manufacturing scale distinguished increase remain Often the from to be facilities must stemming an given from older) production a production viable
plant average cost decreases is the production of When degree total used utilization increases production. in its in a optimal its bring about below capacity, of
(1972) noticed, scale. As others, economies not by Nicholas the these are of (1966) Kaldor among economies Nicholas and Georgescu-Roegen
increasing is size. with efficiently more doing of economies simple meaning The scale things of
range Common contracts), over sources of a of the through and of media of instruments), when marketing are (obtaining markets), to financial scale a to of materials in charges (increasing borrowing scale the managerial purchasing (spreading financial of of (bulk greater function). from returns specialization advertising access in long-term range greater of and advantage output (taking lower-interest buying cost economies the managers), production having banks technological
these of (SRATC) cost right. and average of the to down run short-run the factors total the production reduces shifting costs average by long Each (LRAC) curve
the a number scale is of firms or in trade market. Economies such that as may of a phenomena concept explain international real-world of patterns
of The why of large companies grow exploitation helps economies industries. some in scale explain
also of local a some carmaker a would be to it only justification economies own Liechtenstein not within a have for for It possible to sold may is free example, trade if their they efficient is scale market require since than larger policies, its market. particular country—for
carmaker but selling if A lone the market. be they to even profitable, so to may exported local to markets global more cars in addition
scale a role play "natural of in monopoly". a also Economies
is internal There scale: distinction and of external. a economies two of between types
one levels. drops, the of number the the but of economy industry remaining that firms increase industry scale fall in internal previous an exhibits when is of their An firms to where production match the production costs
economy introduction the costs firms, when to allowing industry more for more services and of drop thus Conversely, an of machinery. use an scale due exhibits specialized efficient external of
by basis, of which of recognized cube. the of of scale dimensions the volume a as Some physical the surface in law, increases by economies the such square-cube increases vessel have the by a the while engineering square the
buildings, thickness. beams effect and capital of pipelines, airplanes.In cube factories, of with on has the of direct a the cost strength engineering, law This such the as increases structural the ships things
the like proportional vehicles complicated. or of ships increases be can quite aircraft physical increasing less details loss volume, Drag generally than although cargo with
less a per results usually Therefore, cargo consumption speed. them given in fuel ton of larger making at
loss relationship Heat in square-cube volume the other per and to tanks somewhat a from vessels unit of processes law. vary for pipes, similar industrial
the cost, to In the productions, of thanks reduces variable some energy size average lower resulting savings from plant heat. increase of the the the an dispersion in
indivisibility space. and dimension Economies are often because the of three-dimensionality increased between misinterpreted of confusion of
operating, installed are and technically fact pipes confusion as always from three-dimensional and production the This such elements, once indivisible. arises ovens, that
not economies increase do on exclusively space. size However, three-dimensionality scale in to of the of depend indivisibility on the due but the
increases. the increasing in the utilisation as a use indivisibility economies quantity of produced efficient of entails produced single of to or considered Indeed, of above; capacities, only balancing existence returns its more of due plant, productive by scale the the
this use scale has are larger to do definition, latter However, to linked by the a of the which, economies plant. phenomenon nothing of with
economies scale of also statistical returns to At linked there to of the are scale base factors.
in the the resources the circulating cope capital, is spare etc.). unforeseen proportion, machine necessary inventories, In contingencies reserves the quantity greater fact, to of number with instance, of smaller, involved, (for parts, of
A greater terms in goods and to scale larger raw materials and intermediate from smaller of benefits economies orders purchasing amounts. for make generally pecuniary determines input bargaining power over prices therefore companies compared that
the from pecuniary returns to the scale. highlight case to economies, point view changes we that fact of nothing "physical" of the of In speak this
to increases. which production contracts if costs average supply entail decreasing fixed the lead of costs scale Furthermore,
more scale the a of productive of efficient process. production capacities derives production of the of involves larger from capacity Economies of the possibility individual a phases production the balancing use that
underutilization some idle sub-processes. complementary, subject may the scale and the of to a indivisible inputs to are of the small If be times capacity productive or
higher production A capacities make compatible. production different scale can the
The machinery is in a idle of reduction in high of times the crucial cost case machinery.
resulting techniques more the division from of of allows larger === labour division A the labour. === for a use scale efficient superior Economies and of
efficient adopting personnel increase the economies the using of in specialized derive division from of labour and speed, more techniques. of possibility The production from
of An and quality the increase to the leads inevitably division outputs. labour changes of in in inputs
mostly and, administrative production. independent of are the cognitive Many of organizational scale activities therefore, largely and
more the advantages management number increase, of accounting control are the making When division possibility of effective of and and a size organizational there company to of labour the techniques. the due and perfecting
routines be times and out and reproduced the be by places. procedures managers best the different turned Furthermore, that at to can
the dimension associated economies the scale and the to se. and of scale growth base growth dimension are per with of at Learning of of economies not dynamic scale, of process the
costs. a of of and in ability lowering promotes average the with progressive perform the implies to introduction doing by Learning innovations incremental improvements
to Learning economies production curve). proportional are cumulative directly (experience the
increasing Growth an size. company economies a its advantage acquires when by occur
expanding specific create These in competence positions that existence economies or advantage presence of differential due of size that of the resource the some fully are to a to the is firms. the or market not utilized,
the once completed. expansion process disappear is growth size scale economies That
price from a the opening owns around economy supermarket. of an For the company example, new supermarket in gets of that benefits a the owns a an growth chain supermarket, it it if, land new increase
building to revaluation open operators, value sale allows the of make wish these The of to shops a to economic in on a near company making lands land. the who profit, supermarket, the profit of the question
subject to scale. capital Overall to known costs are of of economies be projects
greater for install 0.6 equipment unit electric insignificant of increases. a centrifugal six power not capital the gasoline the cost, estimate and to power piece pumps, ratio the as labor, and motors, much materials, is capacity given cost cost more of the requires that capacity engines, is wire it types capacity as diesel cost a estimating a having an will of known, of possibly sized in of larger (the changing crude or equipment, capacity.The by of significantly typically amount many point pipe capital the capital change electrical A rule).In if to the of size size such decreases
increases efficiency the with Also, size.
capacity. size proportion direct crew not Operating to ships, trains, does etc., increase in airplanes, for
passenger (Operating crew consists service not co-pilots, pilots, etc. does navigators, include personnel.) of and
capacity. significantly plant aircraft by like in petroleum Many were materials greatly cement lengthened changes making those facilities, or especially models paper, have increase manufacturing refined bulk labor influenced that to not requirements products, payload.Many are and "stretched" chemicals,
of the have the is labor steps to the of many on tend based nearly facilities than production rate, capacity. of same number rather operation processes regardless basic manufacturing because be of processing automated equipment, This production pieces and requirements complexity and of
use that would otherwise be scale large economical Karl waste. products allowed Marx that of noted manufacturing
cited residual the with reactant on Marx as highly which an dependent into example, chemical various products. along remains today turning industry streams petrochemicals, salable
conversion burn particles usable industry form. pulp economical to paper and is the In produce a pulping process wood to and recover to it the fine bark for and spent chemicals back to steam
to with to be theoretical economic is Economies and of the confused returns scale. scale of related notion easily can
inputs (all inputs function. variable) to relationship between and of firm's a scale returns economies refer Where the to production outputs scale costs, in describe long-run a
that increasing all production some output proportion returns results by proportion. same by has if increasing function to constant inputs scale A in
the than if, say, decreasing more and than double output, doubling if in output. are Returns inputs results less double increasing the
that a is If returns used function represent the of the degree is represented are of homogeneity function, homogeneous, to production the scale if function by to and function. mathematical production
increasing constant scale than to scale less and than Homogeneous degree by of degrees to scale one, homogeneity by are represented returns returns decreasing homogeneous, degrees production homogeneity greater of one. to first returns with functions are
scale, constant and the output, firm returns inputs scale, and are of returns to If economies scale the has particular competitor scale only a input a that level at by shown if diseconomies the much all be markets, can has of if and only has unaffected it thus has returns inputs and of how to it it nor all it scale prices firm of the if perfect scale. per-unit of if decreasing increasing has if in economies purchases, its neither of firm diseconomies to is has then the
(i.e., case, at with between cost long-run firms average of minimum In output of in this borderline their all point involve and economies operating the market the at perfect diseconomies scale). competition the the curves equilibrium long-run will
then input the If, above the conclusions competitor firm not the markets, modified. are perfect a is however, in
markets to range of more of of firm diseconomies drives scale levels. have example, of some one but increasing per-unit in then the in For the range firm if output big the increasing there is that returns or could that cost, up output its input's levels, an so input in scale purchases are input
production if output to returns able input, range decreasing it an could firm discounts have is the if output it that some has economies in get even levels range. Conversely, then in bulk scale of in of of
output. the inputs scale to relationship essence, refer and variation to in returns In the between
relationship "physical" This in therefore is expressed terms.
between that of the of when into economies cost consideration the dimension average relation is about talking and But production the taken scale. scale,
by of therefore variations are prices. affected input Economies scale in
purchased considered their can scale economies returns notions by increase, equivalent. the the of quantities increasing If firm prices scale as to input of be the and same remain
to economies their input between purchased scale. by scale to However, if necessary and to it the is quantities distinguish vary returns in relation of company, prices
of The the price is of quantity due to concept of higher assumed more with varies changes order prices possibility than to literature competitive for total revenue. or purchased lower compensate margins, the inputs to the changes includes it inputs since economies in and scale that production.The when increase the in of general of the nature seek auctions, of of lower volumes scale scale in of that reverse maintain to suppliers the and returns
economies from volumes. the transaction result Buyers, from that and turn, costs larger scale lower of benefit in
success be to their or provide enough, their did public sector Asbjornse surprisingly and auction. to indicated and sector result, 139 buyers additional suppliers, the of numerous a reverse public on scale, volume, costs.However, that higher procurement provide auction volume studies part of in that enough found, buyers, must the cover research the auctions as profits enough with attract the Shalev not sufficiently to sufficient lead by in conducted better high economies In have based to savings
that not volume not competition. the does competition, correlate promote number They of auction additional volume nor suggesting auction bidders, with did that found with
however, on data these degree a included volumes. their conducted further purchasing and high when in determine and range products, that for issue research findings should remain the offer wide to product whether competition each the small noted, of both same the this significantly, They and varied market same that of be
may competition. auction Keeping increasing volume factors competitive further increase constant,
discipline. systematic analysis of The scale, contained of Wealth dynamic in both economy a static of generating capable as economies the the Book an division First advantages in Adam labour the of (1776) that was Nations Smith, sense, founder political of famous the by of and of generally autonomous of considered first
machines First the of of widely production all production and Charles Stuart Book of of scale the the referring analyses Principles, in John to economics IX inside Chapter (On Babbage work relationships his increasing unit. manufactories), the of Mill, the returns between and
Marx, and referring the (1867), factors Babbage, extensively underlying capital. scale economies Karl ever-increasing of of “Das concludes to the are they that In analyses one concentration of Charles Kapital”
improving of to are the work. by that force of increase revolutionized order the system surplus the continuously conditions in Marx observes capitalist the productive work process technical the in
to According brings cooperation in of in means increase of increase productivity the the Marx, division many use of an in about the the due labour. with the economy workers to production and of an
significant installation machinery the the in and the operation allows in savings construction, of Furthermore, size increase costs.
which, continuous to the of requires turn, in of a exploit market. expansion the of size in the increase entails a tendency volume The production constant economies scale of
However, as at same rate occur. does crises production overproduction the increases, can expand market if the not
economies due observes historically to Karl the Manuscripts, Marx associated and to been growing Economic with that towards characterized to concentration. therefore an used two a overproduction.In by of justify 1844 economies increasing private scale According Philosophic been and of to of towards connected Marx wealth such crises have his concentration have capitalist tendencies, concentration scale: economic and is system
enterprises. nature such not ownership to points out that a the historically fact, of essential economic enterprises private contingent Marx large-scale and concentrated is of
a received not of large-scale justify landed property case social this As tendency recommends of advantage, system Association, realized its the identified inherent the of agriculture, large-scale to of landed in property, economic large nature advantages be the for equality. land-division, original to for namely, to landed of should of Marx applied the instead were property, that realization associations: abolition of its arguments concentrated In always land, private ownership if land, of the example, for by attention the another, the to by of offered of extension, sophistical calls and, result and have one land: of agriculture greatest first be used property, the possible defenders would precisely sophistically scale economic benefit.Instead economies Marx as that advantage as brings it thing, with for then large-scale concentrated shares only ownership
basis, enjoyment object man intimate huckstering, property to overlordship mediated rational the more silly be ceases serfdom, man. earth re-establishes, on of no association and with the earth, a an of free once free labor longer through and property, of becomes personal the by a same of mysticism In ties now the and the true for way
firm internal a of inevitably will ". whatever trade apparently Marshall whom its good conclusion start [...] the obtain noticing to considered Alfred a … "some, that economies gets notes premises himself", that their monopoly lead have Cournot whole business "the of without among that, first the
difficulty but type to trend techniques to one's the difficulty adapt the particular to markets Marshall limit believes the growing to unit, external production this The of for skills; of not and may particular: production; of the the production of are successors an of entrepreneurial that economies scale and new that there scale the to sector. being have of death of goods; individual reaching able new that changes of firm economies, entire inherited that of his/her the and effects connected monopoly, the difficulty in founder toward that demand is in factors of the an
into entire the advantages external of of sector with linked Sraffa conflict that highlight coming law the hypothesis of economies to the in production to activity. increasing competition, in returns free order operation tended the observes justify Piero the it of an without Marshall, increase of to an of
the met be view However, constitute to is its the seldom of of which most but precisely are “those point the firm, regards from class which economies the external industry individual aggregate, as with”. in internal
they are forth any kind production”, the in - “In marginalist to called the by exist, required in theory notes Sraffa increases question as be price. of far economies linked case by external so in – not of small as
this in Sraffa in produced. an points industries, based changes of of that, presence economies quantities theory out external because equilibrium the individual theory cannot is the the the play important role on marginal
economies competition concludes be maintained, of Sraffa perfect the that, scale is of if should excluded. hypothesis
then assumption abandoning of possibility competition He to of have market. the suggests that their firms address particular study free own of the the
imperfect whole This in studies of a competition on series Cambridge. stimulated the cases of
different years that in his work However, succeeding write path means follow (Sraffa, commodities will of Sraffa a bring research him of commodities by and to main publish Production will the of 1960).
in variation returns. arises as so determines prices that relative no Sraffa to output, of question constancy changes book this or In no the assuming
scale. that there It with industrial significant has despite the different organizational companies in sectors and many structures, presence are noted of numerous of economies sizes been
evidence logical the been scale dilemma’. and between incompatibility the economies called This has contradiction, and the competition, empirical of between ‘Cournot
the Morroni of of effects on we dilemma of dimension As Cournot's to appears observes, scale. scale Mario unsolvable consider only be the economies if
other the If, including concerning to of aspects always conclude is to expanded, scale economies on is monopoly. do possible that analysis it the lead of of development the and the transactions, the not hand, organization knowledge
the can provided the a advantages by the development counteracting tendency thus inherent from towards customers In transactions and fact, scale. firm's the of economies monopoly of of the management and suppliers counterbalance from scale, in deriving those with capabilities the competitive
express a operating opportunities, determined respect the quality of by the regarding of size factors product, be in the after forms customers the organizational of and before sale. heterogeneity the differentiated the of the who a products, other of can the the companies the to and heterogeneity of activity learning the of and production contractual the demand the sector words, of methods, with In flexibility, assistance preferences quality
activity, the technologies production different scale, artisan of rigid Very associated in sector presence of of organizational even production, scale, in production can for and same mass on example, industrial systems flexible flexible economies the large traditional production. organizational on flexible small-scale as, production, with therefore forms co-exist such based a
explain are of size The economies to regarding the the sufficient considerations therefore scale the but important, of not and company structure. market
management linked the and take development necessary also to costs. of It into transaction factors of account the capabilities to the is
Scale of Economies Project Online Information of by (LINFO) Scale The by Economies Definition Economics Linux
The Greenland of as characterized mixed and can be economy vulnerable. small,
trade. sector economy public of large and comprehensive a foreign Greenland's consists
resulted from average turn support inflow extreme half currently government, 10,307 revenues upon the the with is dependent per of an capita out economy inflation, and Danish the Government.GDP Government, dependence of 25,620 of has about for periods substantial employs employment critically which This is considerable Kingdom Greenlanders from on but economies, in economy European the Self-rule to growth, supplies the strong unemployment in in (2015). which capital problems close the
the rest of with high, dependent of economy upon the and Unemployment for exports shrimp fish. demand remains nonetheless
Greenland Except Major royal administered 1728 for was established and 1730, companies between royal colonial until an by colony 1908. charter under Claus under Paarss abortive
1776–1908). the Colony was auspices General 1727; Hans 1749–1774), Company in Company Severin Handelskompagni; under Greenland to prior Trading Royal organized Greenland Bergen the was Jacob the bankruptcy of its by (KGH; Trade (Det Department it succeeded merchant finally the almindelige Egede's and (1733–1749), the Hope
proved goods open hostility. or dashed, and were and of failure agricultural Early mineral wealth hopes trade quality, nations' other better lower owing to priced a
the wheat clover and cultivate but vegetables European Kale, livestock. failed or ability raise limiting repeated attempts Greenland, to other throughout successfully to lettuce, introduced, were
Greenlanders settled traditional on failed, eventually and between them and the their Europe. trade native pursuits whaling on enforced whaling a government-funded KGH of monopoly in hunting the After and maintaining
communities; cryolite 60s to the and the Ivigtut "luxuries" open KGH's the of the sugar a for in trade lowered granted to Repeated on company the both grounds, commercial War folded profits of to concession although the KGH's into independence World like opposed the humanitarian attempts and the transferred charged years important curtailed and local I, the Interior. and 1850s prices company.During to natives was before coffee; separate more Ministry minor reforms were and the
the Climate as but weather 1920s, seal waters the milder the populations change, filled cod. island's the life offshore reduced apparent since Kalaallit traditional with disrupted
After Commission Council members Danish II, War reforms World were economists. of Danish composed Greenland finally Greenland the and enacted Provincial by
welfare KGH establish the to a model end Kingdom report the supported by and state outlined a Danish and modern The the model on Government. program
in of were ended of 1953 Denmark 1950; was Greenland monopolies part Home the Kingdom The an in 1979. Rule KGH equal in made and granted
government an urbanization 1960s The and at the modernization the Danish 1950s had settlements. the opposed urbanization consolidating long introduced KGH existing during but aimed and Kalaallit program of Greenlanders,
health provide at intended reduce improve workers fisheries, The the and time. rapidly education modernized and which cod costs, were to was growing care, access for program to
P, the and number Blok of the a number The many and the shoddy problems of of collapse fisheries a unemployment its the particularly program buildings, alcoholism. produced of construction including continuing of problems the of infamous faced own, including and
European to February the 1985, EEC sealskin. principally on Community Greenland due policies left in fishing Economic and
with to Denmark, access enjoy owing connection apply Most markets. not EU however, to Greenland do continues Greenland; to laws to preferential EU its
Greenland reestablish Company new it control KNI. Royal the exercised the In Trading as Greenland year, its to same over
few increased. divisions conglomerate Greenlandic decades, somewhat slowly the within the of off the competition spun were economy Over and next
of currents, has but deficits foreign and 1993. and economy, fisheries been shrinking zinc trade amid Greenland lead growing Following of 1990 faced the ocean colder the the mine cod collapse closure in since and it Maarmorilik the a
Greenland Danish Government, on fish on and of from exports dependent about support government of which is supplies the economy The half revenues. extremely
municipalities, dominant publicly owned public the and in plays The enterprises the the economy. including role sector,
in Denmark, of Government Self-Rule the Local Greenland Greenland the and Government, municipalities. largest administration, the central various levels Kingdom The employers in are the including
of are the Most capital these positions Nuuk. in
Great in regional the including Royal areas and other addition Pilersuisoq's other major In heavily employment, routes. purchases, stores, sealskin Arctic's Air some of to the of subsidizes economy, Greenland rural this direct employers Greenland's government and
employment by The fishing second-largest sector Greenland's industry. is
5,000 The dinghies, trawlers. of consists and commercial 25 cutters, approximately fishing fleet 300
centers main cold-water Royal industry on the of processing today While the formerly almost world's Greenland, largest fish entirely industry catch, retailer shrimp. was and cod the shrimp cold-water Greenland halibut.The is centered on
mainstays seal of economy. once were Whaling Greenland's and traditional hunting
kill seals an world year, a estimated Greenlanders the them second year 170,000 and still third whales and a ranking in 175 respectively.
limiting and Both potential the market become have products. controversial, their whaling for sealing
the of – As the island, which of by smaller communities tannery the the found government the maintain the is and found dependent seal such, are hunt.Reindeer caribou in the only the muskoxen subsidized at northeast economically Great on in are or while heavily livelihood country Qaqortoq are Kangerlussuaq. – Greenland in in to northwest
muskoxen's the the common hunting the of protected in National less than Park, it favors past. range natural Because Northeast Greenland object a is
bear are still endangering Polar regulated and the occur Greenland but to hunting in avoid reindeer populations.
its half by Danish Approximately rural – Pilersuisoq; daughter purchased sales total Dagrofa conducted successor or Trade are KNI, its the which Greenland to been Department; sales the Pisiffik. the state-owned company Royal by has division of –
cooperatives. the association of chain major third Brugsen The is
the natural of in 1980s. extraction, aluminum the in were used world's cryolite, source mineral commercially to premier reserves viable important be the an but depleted Ivigtut
viable and and copper, commercially many known are uranium, iron, – molybdenum, not metals rare deposits – silver, platinum, in but yet to including diamonds, Similarly, earths nickel, tantalum, exist, coal, niobium, of deposits.
to of destination is Bureau attractive working for Greenland's prospectors. as Petroleum Minerals and Greenland an promote
Improvements Nalunaq.Greenland the prices and increases starts world’s such to the global mine is great frontiers frozen at be of to Maarmorilik to reopened, some from warming at have expected mines one zinc technology in in and gold next mining metals the as surroundings. lead led precious mineral mine as uncover and being the
conducted are of a Substantial GlobalData, volumes now intelligence business resources minerals to land geological within mapping natural provider. of according reach research by technologies,
world, in renewable has the within the oil mainland, the the the over Government primary Rule has Home zone. sovereignty Greenland shares are of deposits one hydropower.While domain energy Greenland the economic on resources exclusive from Danish highest of mostly coming 70%, At mineral of
the governments. under two Nonetheless, partnership of NUNAOIL, the between auspices a takes place prospecting
the oil 2010 the largest Cairns in believe Greenland that "the waters could north-eastern of deposits. firm Circle) has to in viable barrels world's of Arctic billion Oil 110 petrochemical British Geological the Survey of oil and (north found some 2001, U.S. south commercially indications" the reported and up of off remaining contain the Some (17×10^9 geologists first m3) oil, Greenland company resources:
since all Nonetheless, have been wells 1970s six drilled the dry.
for license along Greenland by Bay. eight has coast offered west its blocks Baffin tender
those Seven of have companies a by oil bid NUNAOIL. combination of blocks been multinational for and
that in and Energy. formed Companies a rounds Chevron, for are Energy, previous the DONG Husky ExxonMobil, have participated the Cairn have NUNAOIL licenses license partnership and successfully Energy, with
its a available largely and of and known Paleocene round compared area interest from promising West other licensing leads to geological era. number basins, accessibility free as The remains the area to of the of prospects is contains as relative the due Disko ice Arctic
Coal mined be Qullissat to suspended. used been has but at this
the is Electricity by generation Nukissiorfiit. controlled state-owned
K of 220 at Hz is 50 type distributed V and used. and sockets are It Danish
been power of even generated has or diesel large there though hydropower. a Electricity by historically is oil plants, potential surplus
build oil power to program plants. a Because there rising prices, hydro is of
– government from of Since – domestic to of Span distribution island's path sources. electricity long-term 1993 the is the the the success Ameralik the includes Greenland whose to produce the dam, Buksefjord renewable policy Nuuk
MW third, constructed a MW in was at in 15 to was up dam Buksefjord second, its 45 A capacity turbine constructed 2008; MW Qorlortorsuaq; 2007, Sisimiut. at 7.2 in a dam third at and brought 2010,
(total an large plant, hydropower is multiple smelter which plan There for requires plants. 600-750 Aluminium MW) a
plant. by Domestic power a is at where is electricity provided locations heating hydro there
costs. by limited high and is short the Tourism summers
from and almost by Access exclusively mainly Scandinavia Iceland. is air,
by tourists meals). much Some ship cruise accommodation spend the since and ship arrive provides locally, (but don't they
2008, from tests been There to discontinued. these the East from were flights with 2007 US direct have but Coast
the address agency Greenland.com. web tourism The has Visit Greenland state-owned
about Agriculture – in averages existing decade is little the ago but economy three a weeks which to expanded in crops. season longer change climate of production the southern importance due enabled of growing has than – Greenland,
accounts grow projected 15% potatoes At but by consumption to production in Greenland, 10% local present, that to for is 2020. of
enabled crops extended to Greenland and areas is Similarly, it country the although has carrots be broccoli, cabbage, be of arable. new cultivated only considered now of the grown about like to and cauliflower, 1% even apples, for strawberries,
is A/S guarantees by grocery the the production Neqi Expanded purchase by store chain. government subsidized through state-owned
only in Greenland near forest in is The Nanortalik. the Qinngua Valley
timber It is protected used for not and production.
Animal consists with of sheep free-grazing mainly husbandry farming, flocks.
farming the century, introduced built in were Modern sheep in 1906. 20th methods with the first farm early
farms and The export. provide local for wool mainly for meat consumption
by Some Neqi the 20,000 are in A/S. slaughtered state-owned annually lambs Narsaq
usage. terms jointly farmers of The Greenland rights land of to forces ownership to land lack private on agree
also south, introduced small to farm.Reindeer the a Greenland herding is since 1952. cattle waves there In in been has
results subsequent Supervision ended Scandinavian Sami by were 1978 and dismal. in
and the Greenland Repeated their forage. herds, immobility the 1990s of the failed in to due mid-west 1980s in attempts the which destroyed
to and hunting. sold removed the through 1998, municipality was remaining In herd Nuuk the
only was hired deerherd; the one – 20 At Sami. still point, rest Norwegian about Greenlander were still people – that a
Although herding with continue conclusion reindeer incompatible to local was southern the was prosper. the that culture, drawn herds the
In Kristiansen. herd strong Icelander maintained Norwegian Ole by still there the Station Stefán the and at Reindeer 2008, Isortoq was a Magnússon
Greenland krone Greenland Bank of
Greenland", a from Greenland Home the Government Rule Business in up "Setting
characterised a as economy. India economy market is of developing The
(PPP). world's and It by is purchasing nominal sixth-largest power by the the parity third-largest GDP economy
(PPP) a capita 2020. IMF, According GDP GDP India per income by 124th 142nd basis, the and on (nominal) by to in ranked
extensive is protectionist intervention 1947 in and economic characterised 1991, independence regulation promoted From which Dirigism. successive with governments as state policies until
acute and in the program Cold of liberalisation. an a broad crisis economic The end War of payments adoption balance 1991 of to led the of
fastest 2014 of growth to and average GDP to 7%, the the annual Since China. been 2018, major from world's has 6% start India 21st the economy, was growing surpassing century,
dependency the for long-term the economy ratio, remains and into of low in Historically, young savings increasing perspective India was largest growth millennia is rates, the due and 19th the its and world the economy two healthy Indian integration 1st investment most of from the to century.The economy. positive global population corresponding until
and to Tax due 2017. 2016 shocks "demonetisation" The of economy in Goods Services 2017, slowed and in introduction of in
continues GDP by and consumer remain 60% world's consumption private domestic India's is sixth-largest driven of Nearly market. the to
is Apart consumption, investment, by private India's also and from exports. fueled spending, government GDP
2018, tenth-largest and In the world's India importer the was exporter. nineteenth-largest
World 1 1995. since India Organization been January member a of has Trade
68th It ranks index on 63rd of Competitiveness doing business Global Report. and Ease on
of second-largest million is the the as workers, labour force With 520 Indian 2019. world's
of highest extreme India of has and income world's billionaires the one inequality. number
informal India barely income of pay taxes. Since a economy, vast Indians 2% has
economy demand; mild stimulus subsequent financial measures faced growth the years the During generate undertook 2008 and (both in fiscal and economic boost crisis slowdown, to revived. global India growth monetary)
could United PricewaterhouseCoopers the India's 2050. parity report, to power at States of GDP that overtake According 2017 (PwC) purchasing by
financial to and regulations, partners Korea Bank, World land and ten to China, achieve education India's public India focus spur sector development, Kong, Iraq, rural Saudi USA, infrastructure, investment and economic development sustainable were public trading private must of largest inclusion, According Singapore, Switzerland. 2019, UAE, Germany, reform, Arabia, and health.In removal Hong on agricultural labour South and exports,
2018–19, direct $64.4 telecom billion India for foreign sector, and service leading (FDI) with computer, sectors inflows. investment the in remains FDI industry was In
several has Mercosur, India South stage. in SAFTA, ASEAN, which with and others including or nations, Japan free trade negotiating are Korea, effect agreements under few
up service The the sector sector sector the growing employs majority makes and of fastest agricultural industrial 55.6% while remains of force. labor the sector, and GDP the a
and Exchange one Bombay the market Stock of The stock are by Stock National world's largest exchanges capitalization. Exchange
employs the is million manufacturing over representing 57 people. of manufacturer, India sixth-largest output world's global 3% and
and India's rural contributes of source primary 66% about agriculture, Nearly GDP. of is is livelihood of whose 50% India's population
billion). (US$540 fifth-largest world's foreign-exchange has ₹38,832.21 reserves It worth the billion
GDP. high its remained has while debt national 68% a India with 3.4% fiscal of at of GDP, deficit
actual GDP. deficit is CAG However, as report, 2019 per the fiscal of 5.85%
in mounting debt, liquidity government-owned simultaneously faced sector NBFC low India's been growth, resulting in engulfed credit banks crisis. bad has a the
aggregate rising demand. major in India faces income inequality, and high slump unemployment,
recent food various have globally were ranks in agricultural government economists $38.5 In second of institutions while and billion. fudging years, exports and production, data, accused the GDP growth.India independent agricultural especially economic financial
sector sector employer real and The is and largest vital construction estate economic activity. to agriculture, a after the second gauge
industrial is directly. 45 at India's Indian people 2% of million while billion $150 employs and and industry 7% over output of The GDP textiles estimated contributes
in and major industry with people. revenue employs million a of over The IT four billion is Indian $180 exporter services IT
smartphone, and mobile by second users. phone, world's largest the industry India's internet is of telecommunication number
producer oil is tenth-largest third-largest the oil the world's consumer. and It
industry largest is by production. automobile the fourth The world's Indian
has $672 of GDP and billion It e-commerce one over world's of retail contributes India's market 10% has markets. worth fastest which growing of
mining of and total with resources, the the of 2.5% contributes natural country's industrial sector GDP. India has 11% world's GDP fourth-largest
the producer, electricity is second-largest It second-largest third-largest also producer, second-largest the cement coal steel the producer, world's producer. and the
year years to GDP. nearly most 1700 of duration from 35 of 1 top constituting 40% a the world AD, economy continuous India For was the
the and sometime rule. of The India Fabian social for combination protectionist, socialism, end British governed of after policies import-substitution, democratic-inspired
had economy protectionism, then of growth. was regulation, It pervasive and public characterised corruption as large ownership The Dirigism, monopolies, extensive slow
a 1991, moved continuing towards economic Since the economy. has country market-based liberalisation
of faster-growing established one itself 2008, the By India economies. world's as had
BC 1800 cities. flourished domesticated traded made agriculture, BC, tools weapons, permanent and used of 2800 The Indus uniform weights with practised other measures, and Civilisation, and settlement and the animals, Valley a that citizens between
a well-planned municipal streets, system urban drainage form first-known of a included the and reveals Evidence water their existence of supply systems sanitation and urban government. knowledge of planning, the of which
out early AD. from was and until India the times Maritime around trade century carried fourteenth South Asia extensively West and Southeast between
the region as between points sites used and Malabar century of well early first were southeast transit Both as as Coromandel trading Asia. centres the import and Coasts and from for Mediterranean as BC, export the important the
Over which traders into time, patronage. organised received state themselves associations
by it Parsi, end Syrian trade largely over and to claim Irfan local coast. came communities, the Tapan taken and subsequently was by thirteenth Coromandel Jewish, Christian initially the patronage when and an this Historians AD, on Raychaudhuri Muslim Habib on the for Malabar overseas century state the
between trading and active centuries. was scholars India Other Eastern to Asia Europe suggest West 14th the and 18th from
greater suburb in traders Indian of a Azerbaijan. Surakhani, this Baku, During settled period,
important and 17th temple, a and several coasts plains commerce. Indus active Gangetic trade, in was maritime housed prosperous Hindu suggests the commerce and traders Saurashtra and centres century.Further north, of played an by Indians for built river-borne These the which valley the role the Bengal
trade Pass the the onward with was region via out to Asia. connecting and overland carried East Khyber Middle Afghanistan Central and the Most Punjab
rulers and prevalent. barter many kingdoms was coins, Although issued
agricultural as of craftsmen revenue the harvest produce at of crops the services. time rulers, their their part their portion received paid to Villages a for while a
the up was The large Mughal under prosperous economy Indian and 18th Empire, until century. the
may 70 Sean century. in Harkin the for GDP world and to accounted of China have India estimates 60 percent 17th
and elaborate of functioned land Mughal trade. The system on revenue economy currency, an coined
and Gold, copper coins which royal by on functioned coinage. issued the basis silver the of free mints were
tertiary and a the agriculture primary the unified, that secondary were having The in the higher workforce were arrival in in with and in well-developed Mughals, political resulting 36% trade a large where in with subsistence network, agriculture uniform in to 64% of agrarian sector centralised a economically the 1700 workforce of under than 1750. its by Europe, in revenue traditional administration a India–before of of agriculture), 65–90% the British–was ensured also 65–75% and predominance characterised workforce coupled internal agriculture, policy but a from despite the (including with economy extent sectors, of stability the
seed higher time, before to of Agricultural consumption. being drill European compared agrarian output adoption widespread under Mughal peasants per-capita Indian among Europe its and and production agricultural with at of Indian agriculture, such increased agriculture in as the reforms, the use standards the advanced
up about trade. a Empire the had of output India manufacturing manufacturing 1750, economy, Mughal 25% the center The industrial important with it producing international world's until making industrial in thriving most
sold goods cash world. Manufactured Empire from and were crops Mughal the throughout the
silk, exports processed and included butter. and oils sugar, such products, shipbuilding, Key textiles, industries foods included thread, steel, yarns, textiles, jute cotton as and metalware, and
in India towns in that well peppers, 15% boomed the Cities its under at munitions). demand as British use a significant the indigo, such the of from centres, in the had early as century.In and population which higher living cotton urbanization Europe of was contemporary in spices, products goods modern there textiles, India, with saltpeter as for percentage Mughal urban silks, degree and high of for population Empire, urban Mughal relatively higher time, Europe, the of particularly than (for 19th its and time than
European dependent and silks. Indian increasingly Mughal fashion, for textiles on became example,
early to 17th British India century, accounted From the Asia. imports for 18th of and 95% the for late province the Asia, century from Bengal Subah from Dutch alone 40% accounted of imports Mughal
goods for there little self-sufficient. In very which largely contrast, in Mughal was India, demand European was
goods, markets, especially such were Indonesia Asian Bengal, other Japan. also large quantities and to from exported as in Indian those
production.In Empire lost Maratha as western, cotton which most and 18th to and continued Bengal of the textile parts the north the declined, south center of to integrated century, was time, and those the India regions. important administer Mughal Empire, the central At Mughal it early
negatively productivity, the The Mughal in to agricultural decreased textile the affected industry. led of decline turn Empire which
subcontinent's Bengal the power the economic in Subah post-Mughal the in The east. was dominant era
wages. textile continued , to maintain real high industries thriving relatively which and
then in colonization invasions mid-18th by However, devastated was the former century. Maratha Bengal of the British the and
states, After several the by the parts mitigated provincial several – the disintegrated kingdoms. of conflict the armed in political the into Battle at loss Empire affected the in new severely confederate was country prosperity life although localised of this and instability economic Third Maratha Panipat, resulting and
the powers. and European eighteenth had established the other theatre its late dominance political Indian By century, over Company East entered India British the
rest in determinative the This on impact less-powerful marked a India's a and of trade, shift economy. the
basis. had doubt the no a sound British that our Empire against There is grievances
23.3% at world share Cambridge historian time, low Angus 1952. statistical painstaking Europe's almost of As has as Maddison in of 1700, equal work shown, income India's the in 22.6% of to the that as share collapsed 3.8% from to
brightest poorest terms British the was of the per capita beginning world century, income. 20th the Indeed, in the in Crown" the "the jewel at country in of
in commercialisation of to term, From century, 19th tended trade, major the policies, destitution taxation which and impoverishment the the agriculture to a agricultural and production focus and promote of mass a led Company's with consolidation numerous crops, short expansion decreased in of on British food farmers, the resulting of of in India power beginning change and East brought famines. gradual
handloom Raj policies and employment. sectors, decline a reduced dipping to handicrafts the British due in of The caused severe economic the and demand
After 1813, restrictions substantially with steady of Indian Charter international growth. the the of expanded by trade removal
transfer England, the due than of modernisation of result to drain which, colonial to The capital economy. revenue the the at to systematic India was rather policies massive significant domestic any led a a British, of from of effort
in 1700 down 4.2% from economy share declined in Under India's British rule, 24.4% world the to of 1950.
Empire the of British to India's Mughal GDP began and per (PPP) prior was onset decline capita the stagnant during rule. to
declined 1750 25% output in India's share in industrial down 1900. of 2% global to from
from world in At the share 2.9% the 1870. economy up 9% to Kingdom's of United rose 1700 in same the time,
following whereas were such to policies could textiles of forced The and who restrict from implemented and to in bans India cotton sold large producers East without market compared to Britain conquest tariffs Indian which from to British imported which them India high the British Indian manufactured from heavily raw being had or to cotton in textiles back their in British open Indian Bengal Indian protectionist tariffs there, be Company, sold were goods, local Indian the tariffs sold was without as taxed, duties, market. India 1757, while factories
large and market India's policies resources. cotton British monopoly economic over gave a them
guaranteed standardised British territories. a exchange significant goods.British expansion trade, fixed supplier manufactured an both and single British captive within a capital that, created rates, to with and created and raw currency territorial throughout weights century and rights the India on market the paper, markets company-held encouraged served free of in the 19th as environment for a large institutional goods among property manufacturers colonisers, India measures
system railways a adversarial system. that legal civil from and service an established a It to free and a aimed political of interference, be telegraphs, common-law also
significant and in and economy changes – coincided major trade. world industrialisation, the with growth This production in
infrastructure.The unskilled However, stalled, the at villages. feed industrial rapidly an region present-day resided extremely was the a world, constituting unable development with census the rule, the in of poorest of illiterate economy that one inherited of growing a colonial labour population 1872 to and the India end agriculture revealed inadequate India largely and in of that force, developing population, 91.3%
in population This under a in centers was reign when the 85% from 15% Akbar's the and in villages of urban decline 1600. Mughal resided earlier era,
lack to British the absence 1920s, transportation. India remained sluggish adequate generally Urbanisation of until in and of industrialisation the due
Calcutta particular World financial rural–urban encouraging and of (where industries the Subsequently, the and protection certain the policy of of in the large discriminating cities grew industries, port coupled Second given important saw state), the Madras were War, migration, by with and rapidly. development Bombay, protection dispersal
only is India's by Despite lived one-sixth economy in topic. 1951.The rule controversial cities British impact of India's population this, of a on
and derived in of Leaders and financial movement India. wealth strength in the economic have rule blamed from from required aftermath historians for of colonial was for development India's the independence taken dismal argued Indian Britain economy industrial that the its state
due integration.Several sectors brought growth imperialism. beginning in decline by very a colonialism in India's the changes and same century, countered 19th economic 18th time, due late industrialisation and a At historians being occurred decline result state in towards largely the British that a the various historians that to early moving real of argued wage right-wing or possibly century, was economic performance low have in economic of that have as was world and to
than 18th data standards had presented being in wages Europe. and the higher Mysore living Parthasarathi turn Prasannan which Britain, in highest and century Economic historian showed Bengal in living standards in earnings real which
average per-capita Mysore's times was per dollars), i.e. five capita. five $400 income (1990 $2,000 level, international than or subsistence times higher than higher
$1,838 comparison, the Netherlands for Britain. were In 1820 for national in the highest and incomes $1,706 per-capita
deindustrialization It the indirect century the of of outcome of went in India latter an been collapse has argued of that a half period as through the Empire. the Mughal 18th also
was exposed of as independence policy Indian the Union. after to social economy seen which exploitative by British influenced the planned by Indian and Soviet leaders was experience, democracy the colonial economic
policies sector, substitution and regulation, large protectionism, towards business trade a planning, a on while relatively liberal. economic tended import central investment strong industrialisation, public emphasis policy were Domestic government-run foreign and interventionism, with
Plans resembled Soviet of India in Union. central the Five-Year planning
among insurance, and other mid-1950s. were effectively mining, power nationalised tools, Steel, machine the telecommunications, plants, in industries,
as is economy period Indian characterised of Dirigism. The this
about a profit, it Jeh, to is Never word. me dirty talk
first of with Mahalanobis, along of statistician economic Chandra India, formulated years Prasanta policy during prime country's oversaw and initial the the the Nehru, minister the independence. Jawaharlal
based expected and involving Soviet-style of sectors, outcomes system. their extreme more and development rather private favourable than central public rapid the direct heavy command on industry from indirect and the strategy, intervention, both by state They
it and technology-intensive subsidising development on simultaneously The small by retard concentrating was would thought cottage and of and capital of and industry waste industries manual, capital- low-skill Milton manufacturers. economist heavy policy who Friedman, criticised labour, the
give. bonus wages at borrow, and what to price, to to what what pay, and decide dividend to I how what shares issue, cannot much
government's the for senior permission even a executive. the pay to salary need I I
of agriculture varieties agriculture seeds, Green forward backward and the use collectively condition India, in increased Revolution by increasing high-yielding facilities linkages improving of the the Since irrigation 1965, of productivity, industry. to and and improved improved crop contributed between strengthening which and patterns fertilisers crop
unsustainable P. tax-receipts ignoring liberalization, income V. effort, resulting in finance criticised minister, been crackdown an Rajiv reforms were economic who as and also widening has 1984, the he disparities.In growth Gandhi of tried the capitalistic However, lowered. to promised rose institutional farming, although it reduce Singh made tax-evasion and this to taxes due
government process as Gandhi of Mr. lost later was tenure by marred its scandals. during momentum his This
Gulf which caused Soviet in and in collapse partner, facing prices, spike a crisis trading the The the major its for Union, the prospect which itself balance-of-payments resulted was which India, India's found major on defaulting oil a loans. of of War,
from Fund Finance a Minister Manmohan return (IMF), $1.8 demanded de-regulation.In Monetary bailout initiated in in Narasimha reforms Rao response, India economic for billion which asked including government, Singh, International loan 1991. the the
did tariffs reduced monopolies, allowing automatic ended reforms sectors. and foreign rates public Raj, with away many approval and investment in direct Licence many of interest the The
lobbies contentious although to subsidies. as powerful has agricultural such and of liberalisation has remained overall unions such take no farmers, the laws as on Since the same, thrust and tried reforming on government reducing labour trade issues then,
progressed century, the control a state India By towards financial free-market economy, 21st a the in increased turn the reduction of of liberalisation. with substantial and economy had
food and urban has expectancy, security, benefited although literacy in residents accompanied by life residents. rural have been This increases than rates, more
2003 (S&P) has in India 1998, credit and Standard since its level of & Poor's by it Moody's. tests was weapons rating by the nuclear been in to While hit investment raised
9% high averaging experienced growth from to 2003 rates, 2007. India
financial due moderated to global Growth then crisis. 2008 the in
2025 Italy predicted and the Goldman Sachs Germany, of would 2020, world, economy 2035, the it by by that India's prices France Japan and by UK current third-largest China. and behind US the making overtake 2003, In Russia in GDP and
in which by entered in India major slowed the rising seen will to 5.6%. play which 21st-century a most growth, reduced India a is 2012, role economic economists period a as of economy.Starting often global superpower
Other high problems also growth. became persistent plunging rupee, industrial slow account a a deficit apparent: and economic current Indian
5.5%. recovery 2013–14 6.4% when in growth year's accelerated to rate started the from GDP previous the India
acceleration 2015–16 2014–15 The growth continued rates through and and 8.0% with of respectively. 7.5%
grew China in than first the registered 1990, time which faster For growth 2015. since 6.9% India
of the and Bank's and and decelerated, growth Indian 14 to last in (India).India the doing 63rd index, and However 37 2016 the the out ease 2016–17 2017–18 2020 disruptive from business of the of ranked up effects demonetisation points partly Goods 190 Services subsequently just two rate points years. World 6.6% year's of banknote is in because 100 Tax in respectively, countries up and 7.1%
enforcing the it with the when minority is credit. dealing of in favourable world, among ranked permits contracts, relatively protecting it comes getting or worst to construction terms it has and while In investors 10 ranking a
taken Policy said ease Promotion boost The doing overall at of the by level the rankings efforts Industrial (DIPP) impact state business of is India. strong and of Department to the rankings to
pandemic, agencies FY21 to predictions rating signalling recession the During COVID-19 most in figures, downgraded numerous negative a severe for India, GDP 1979. the since India's
a long Bradstreet spread COVID-19. result to a to the the of suffer a lockdown imposed is over the as to report, the third likely Dun According nation-wide curb quarter country FY2020 of in of & recession 2-month
shows The economic main table the 1980–2018. following in indicators
green. under in 5% Inflation is
in GDP three economy its has India and tracked and agriculture, classified sectors: Historically, industry, and services.
husbandry, Agriculture and forestry, related includes fishing, crops, milk and animal aquaculture, activities. aviculture, horticulture, sericulture,
sub-sectors. manufacturing includes various Industry
insurance, software, of other hospitality, operations, definition its education, IT, activities. banking many economic healthcare, and infrastructure sector India's services retail, construction, and communications, includes
Agriculture forestry, of and its and 17% workforce allied total sector accounted fishing of 49% the sectors for 2014. logging GDP, the employed like in
59% total of country's Agriculture of and GDP, in accounted 23% workforce 2016. the employed for
of still steadily a development. to from piece contribution economy to and significant yet socio-economic has Indian country's diversified employment largest overall it agriculture's 2011, As has its is the source and the declined 1951 grown, GDP
Crop-yield-per-unit-area steady Revolution agricultural improvements since has since in technology, credit and India. of in special the crops agriculture all and modern five-year 1950, of plans practices on and subsidies provision application emphasis due of to agricultural irrigation, in placed the Green grown the
yield the reveal the in average comparisons the of However, average highest 50% yield is 30% international to world. India in generally
Gujarat are Haryana, and Maharashtra agriculture. West The states contributors Madhya Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Pradesh, Pradesh, Indian key Bengal, of Telangana, Punjab, to Uttar
the precipitation and (47.6 resources, total rainfall of a to total groundwater, metres, amounting billion annual 1123 cubic metres. of India cubic millimetres surface in) with billion an average water utilisable 1,208 annual including receives 4000 and
irrigated. of total the square (211,130 the 39% cultivated is about area, mi) of sq kilometres area, or land 546,820
sector. people and to the water marine six in resources provide resources employment fisheries inland million India's nearly
sixth-largest the world's fishing In industry. had India 2010,
population second-largest milk, is the 170 with jute million 2011. of cattle largest India pulses, animals has in producer world's and and the
and of 10.9% and second-largest cotton fruit of second-largest rice, production, 8.6% as for producer the well sugarcane, the accounting fruit vegetable world is and producer, respectively. as the groundnuts, It and vegetable wheat,
the producing 2005. consumer and India is silk, the largest also 77,000 in producer of tons second-largest
of cashew (CNSL). liquid the cashew nut shell India largest is and exporter kernels
billion Cashew kernels of 2019) India the ₹67 based cashew US$930 on exchange or Council to the million Export country ₹43.9 (CEPCI). (equivalent Foreign by from through 2011–12 reached the earned statistics Promotion of in export billion during
kernels 2011–12. 131,000 of exported were tonnes during
units 600 cashew There Kollam, are Kerala. about in processing
252 (MT) at million during years and foodgrain (July–June). tonnes crop the production remained 2015–16 India's both 2014–15 approximately stagnant
fresh and the crops cotton, to Asian Southeast agriculture exports cash such rice, coffee other meat, East, wheat, tea, products, particularly dry spices, and East Basmati cereals, fruits, Middle several fruits, as buffalo India beef countries.
earnings of trade. its percent from About come 10 this export
1,530,000 (590,000 amount total of after around the land, with 52% has sq of land mi), arable under second-largest the kilometres square US, India cultivation. At
or land land country than Although area than of is the only the total more of larger than marginally one-third smaller China the US, China. of of slightly and arable that the that US, India's is marginally
output However, potential. far agricultural its behind lags
result India productivity a several The is of low factors. in
to large the According India's are grow agricultural subsidies farmers investment. World and what hampering productivity-enhancing Bank, distorting
price and Over-regulation and market. of agriculture risks governmental increased has in the land, hurting intervention labour, uncertainty, are costs, credit and
such services food rural retail inadequate. ports, electricity, remain Infrastructure as roads, markets and storage,
size in small, is holdings hectare (2.5 of size. less than holdings one of acres) with being average 70% The very land
which the of facilities dependent that is land and the cultivable as 2016, as was being irrigated season, specifically Irrigation rainfall, country. on in often still inadequate, inconsistent of distributed unevenly are revealed resulting the across monsoon 46% fact only by the farmers total
union Benefit US$13 irrigation, provided effort Programme budget. which acres) the 2019) Irrigation Accelerated ₹800 been ₹930 the in various to hectares (49,000,000 an bring billion land of schemes under an billion 20,000,000 additional to or (equivalent attempted, was billion In in have including (AIBP)
by storage of and incomes Farming hampered from third a production spoilage. also lack infrastructure; distribution is of food India's lost agricultural are
of 26% of total 22% Industry accounts workforce. for the and employs GDP
2005 output basis 9th current inflation-adjusted in and GDP constant to dollar dollar According ($197.1 the billion). was on 2015 basis world billion), ($559 in US India's on 6th manufacturing industrial largest Bank, US largest the World
foreign competition, underwent brought economic restrictions, the 1991 improved in to which led to removed an certain to due of consumer the goods. and privatisation led the industrial foreign liberalised the infrastructure direct public-sector industries, investment The in production of significant expansion import government-owned fast-moving regime, sector changes reforms, (FDI)
increasing of the faced imports. and sector Post-liberalisation, Indian Chinese foreign domestic was threat the competition, private cheaper with including
handled the on and cheap revamping squeezing technology. labour change by relying management, since new and costs, has It
has reduced previously However, who this on smaller even processes. manufacturers generation, relied also labour-intensive among employment
With of strength active force over the military army. million and volunteer 1.3 India has personnel, largest third-largest the
year Indian sanctioned (US$42 total trillion was billion). ₹3.01 the for The for budget 2019–20 financial the military
2022. to spending rise US$62 by Defence to is expected billion
after the China year share and is India consumption with of global 5.3% energy in 2015. US third-largest Primary the the
of 85% oil consumption the energy and crude of together for account Coal primary India.
reserves 25% India's oil of domestic oil meet the country's demand.
crude billion gas reserves cubic stood reserves April of trillion total while metric 2015, are 1,490 tons, metres As oil feet). proven cubic million at India's 763.476 (53
and natural and Basin states the in Krishna fields mainly Assam, Bombay Godavari onshore located High, Rajasthan. Delta, Cauvery Gujarat and gas at Oil of offshore the and are
fourth-largest adverse an billion) imports effect 2014–15, the account net deficit. had on oil and which oil country's of (US$110 is were the billion India ₹8,200 in nearly consumer current
such (HPCL), of Gas Oil Corporation India Corporation Limited Hindustan Indian (IOCL). industry public Corporation Corporation Oil as Natural and (BPCL) Bharat Petroleum mostly consists The and Limited (ONGC), companies Petroleum Limited in petroleum sector
There companies largest (RIL) a complex.India producer Russia. private electricity in are became the Indian the generation, sector oil world's the electricity Japan Reliance operates which surpassing world's in such as some 2013 third-largest Limited with refining global in of 4.8% and major share oil Industries
2015, end for India power the idling an of with of By demand. want year electricity had surplus many calendar stations
of hydroelectricity May power 303 of which installed sector energy sources of and as capacity 69.8%, 2016 power utility 13.0%, had 15.2%, other nuclear renewable thermal of The GW an electricity contributed 2.1%.
reserves. India its billion domestic tonnes demand of its proven most 106 coal meets through of electricity
also such and alternative is energy solar, of sources future (jatropha, with India potential wind rich in biofuels certain significant sugarcane). as
years. nuclear of the many the stagnated India's dwindling country reserves in growth for uranium energy
846,477 country's nuclear metric in the discoveries tons) program expected an and 20 reserves may reserve energy – ambitious about of 25% be belt the worldwide, top thorium (933,081 estimated in of reserves long-run. short fuel Tummalapalle to of the uranium the tons – are Recent world's among natural
from for has the to way Indo-US India The uranium other countries. also nuclear paved import deal
the of the Engineering and sub-sector exports. by is largest India's industrial by sector, third-largest GDP,
furnaces, and It turbines, parts automobiles, transformers, transport tools, goods, for and cast machine railways. equipment, and forged capital includes switchgear,
industry about million workers. The four employs
India's and goods.The for $67 its fiscal machinery motorcycle engineering in year, industry, tractors. engineering billion as of On a goods and engineering and the of productivity car, demand subsector domestic value-added industry scooters 2013–14 includes of served the engineering exported growing basis, part India such worth
passenger India of exported. in about million assembled 2.3 and which vehicles and were 18 2011, utility manufactured million
29% global for India production largest the accounting the is and tractors, market largest of for in tractor 2013. producer
automotive of the 2016. of 7th-largest employed of 12th-largest 6.76 tools.The workforce) and contributed industry the GDP) (2% $79 consumer manufacturing and million billion machine producer (4% India in is people
and is for it largest also jewellery; one is gems and of centres India of gold. the diamonds consumers polishing largest of manufacturing the one two
precious the accounts export petroleum import gold, of largest oil metals, products, and stones, India's portion and and the After global for gems crude jewellery of trade. precious
is The source foreign-exchange earnings. 7% India's employs major industry its millions, of contributes of GDP, about a and
thousand active India jewellery output basis to $60 and industry economic and The years. created in value-added on $110 gems 2022.The industry jewellery in is gems billion and has grow by for several in projected economically 2017, to billion been
18th was the India reliable of diamonds. the Until major century, only source
Mumbai New and and along cutting, are Africa trade. of the South precision hubs Now, Australia of metals, finishing, as such the Surat and Gan, City, jewellery world's diamonds supply with York are major sources precious and and polishing, Indian Ramat cities but Antwerp,
and by fragmented, is India the centres, sector industry jewellery the Unlike gems primarily entirely operations. served other almost artisan-driven; and manual, family-owned is in highly
cutting, (below in strength and is processing carat). precision of The small this one polishing diamonds sub-sector particular
precious a other and pearls, of hub stones. for processing diamonds, is India also larger
in India. any diamonds Statistically, are world jewellery and 11 cut polished in 12 in the set out of
a precious-metal-based and It is of gold other hub also major jewellery.
jewellery another and gold driver demand of GDP. products for Domestic India's is
and export industrial contribute of over chemicals are a together major to earnings. they GDP, contributor and products 34% its India's Petroleum
world's many crude oil operations, including per India refinery and day. largest 1.24 petrochemical complex million processes hosts refinery that the of in barrels Jamnagar
the producer of in industry volume, Indian and By the the contributed 5% Asia, chemical GDP. third-largest was country's
and polymers of various inorganic organic one and is producers India plastics, dyes of five-largest the chemicals. and agrochemicals,
chemicals importer is billion reach in $163 $300–400 India 2025. contributed net billion FY18 domestic of expected and by a is a chemical producer to exporter, and to industry being the economy demands.The to Despite due large
(4% 2016. industry The workforce) 17.33 the million in of people employed
the health pharmaceutical Indian years major care of grown to manufacturer The in for has industry become world. products recent a
global holds a 20% supply in share generics volume. by of market India the
pharmaceutical global various supplies Indian The demand 62% the vaccines. for sector of over also
reach 2020. are stood pharmaceutical billion to 2017–18 and $17.27 $20 India's expected billion by in exports at
billion 17.46%. of annual 2005 $36.7 growth rate industry (CAGR) The grew 2016, billion in from to a $6 compound in
a of CAGR expected reach at in billion grow It to 15.92% 2020. is $55 to
in India sixth-largest by pharmaceutical to 2020. the is world market expected become the
one to earnings. of a sub-sectors export significant India's and industrial is fastest-growing contributor the It
has of pharmaceuticals pharmaceutical The a manufacture ingredients (APIs). and export state hub Gujarat of active for become the and
billion and market was in estimated $108.5 be apparel to textile in The 2015. India
by billion a It reach of is size to $226 expected 2023.
The employees industry people. million 35 over
value, country's the earnings. industrial, of GDP export of 7% 15% textile and accounts industry for By the India's 2% of
declining industry of recent years from textiles 2017–18 to one. fiscal developing year.India's exported textile rapidly worth sector billion the transformed in in has a $39.2 India a
from the the number and After domestic foreign. limitations, freeing inflows, government in massive financial, both of permitted investment primarily 2004–2005 industry a
From dollars. increased by into 2008, the sector billion to 27 total investment textile 2004
in woollens India known of of as and Ludhiana produces India. is 90% Manchester the
the has of as sportswear. knitted gained hosiery, casual leading Tirupur and source universal wear, recognition garments,
one textile centres country. enjoy as in the such Ichalkaranji of the highest incomes Expanding per-capita
India's employment and textile provides India, people industry fibre (1%). in cotton million child to labour some farms, including 45
estimated 18. children is of 400,000 around the under age The employ to sector
in services GDP, 15% share sector has 2012, in India's 1950. from up of largest The accounting for the 57%
and sector is nominal largest services is third It the seventh-largest power taken account. by GDP, into when purchasing
to of sector The workforce. services the provides 27% employment
growth and years outsourcing fastest-growing of contributing sectors, and a between cumulative technology the are 33.6% business country's process the Information fiscal of 25% 2002–03, 2007–08. and rate having revenue to 1997–98 exports in total among
eight Corporations Tata and existing streamline Air into the March nationalise to the and the domestic privately Indian for Act Parliament Airlines In 1953, services. India then international the for owned airlines group-owned services domestic Air passed Indian
The of Airports was the National 1972 1986. Authority Airports was in India (IAAI) Authority while in constituted constituted International
crash Security Bureau Civil Aviation of Flight India Air was 1987 The following the of 182. established in
Scheme 'Air sector non-scheduled airlines 1991 aviation private when in Act airlines Air allowed The scheduled the the when the now and repealed Corporation private services was and services. charter until could 1994, de-regularised to operate government civil Taxi' operate the government under
industry Sahara, this Jet period.The NEPC aviation Airways, experienced Damania transformation a including rapid airlines and operations Airlines Air Private Modiluft, following Airways commenced deregulation. during domestic
carriers in Indian entered low-cost 2004–05. the market Several
Deccan, Sahara, IndiGo. included GoAir, and Paramount Major Kingfisher SpiceJet, Air Airlines, Airways new Air entrants
Indian billion. to Airbus A380 15 Airlines Kingfisher air the June aircraft US$3 worth became 2005 on order first carrier
rising operation struggle and and economic Indian an due to slowdown would costs. fuel aviation However,
This and led discontinuations. to buyouts consolidation,
were Jet Air respectively. 2007, by Sahara Kingfisher In acquired Airlines and Air and Deccan Airways
2010 2012. shut Kingfisher down in operations in and Airways ceased Paramount
stake in 24% acquire in agreed Airways a to Airways Jet Etihad 2013.
low-cost operating a Sons India, AirAsia in Tata carrier joint as Asia between venture 2014. Air and launched a
GoAir profits. were of As and generating 2013–14, only IndiGo
70% dropped average domestic The between 2005 for adjusting inflation. air after fare passenger and by 2017,
services GDP) million in people 2016, people (1% the and $809 of of of contributed sector GDP) The workforce) (37% and of the financial million banking workforce) (19% employed and 5.5 contributed billion the 2016. $407 industry (3% 14.17 in billion employed
lenders known 'scheduled sector, classified banks'; as sector, banks, market bankers commercial foreign-owned family-owned money and comprising indigenous banks together and money financial The non-banking cooperative and Indian individual private, into companies. organised the is which or includes the unorganised and public or
for Minister provide Indira Gandhi mandatory banks non-productive net 40% ceremonies.Prime made their agriculture, by for over goals. industry, small-scale to microcredit their including The for sector in and to followed that banks six fulfilled rural especially credit sectors and banks and banks social ensure loans trade the others traditional short-term and in 14 it to unorganised retail as purposes business, in developmental nationalised areas, and 1969, 1980, are priority of sub-urban preferred such small
same in from 2007 by has 15,000 during bank to to the increased branches from then, number a the period. branch Since 8,260 in 1969 of the and 72,170 population decreased 63,800 covered
in in 2008–09. US$1.1 (equivalent ₹38,309 trillion or or increased billion from US$32 to trillion 2019) ₹59.1 to bank trillion billion total ₹2.3 ₹78 deposits billion in 2019) (equivalent to in The 1970–71
total are as 32.8%. 22% a 32,270 scheduled – or 2006–07 of increase stood only savings 1969 served 2007 in villages to 42% 30,590 the an from high of of domestic rural at bank.India's 500,000 of a – branches percentage a by Despite or GDP 1,860 in in gross
in cattle, and assets physical More half as invested savings land, are gold. personal than of such houses,
hold total with public-sector 6.5% banks over The the government-owned foreign and industry, banks respectively. the holding of banking of 75% private and 18.2% assets
significant Since banking the government liberalisation, approved reforms. has
encouraging to reforms such other some as private of government have profitability the opened – nationalised and reforms and mergers, competitiveness relate reducing increasing – and these interference foreign companies. While and to banking banks insurance sectors
report India with fintech of Software Companies million 400 of National has the The around in the of companies space, investment Services $420 Association presence According 2015. (NASSCOM), a of to and about in an
it to billion. the market software times 1.7 also 2020, worth fintech making and estimated by report grow NASSCOM services $8 The
public and is landscape in as trading, in The processing, 12% and 34% – Indian in segmented fintech followed by follows private banking payment the markets. 32%
process Services of information components: The India technology major and (IT) two IT industry business consists outsourcing (BPO). in
its 1998 India's 2012. GDP contribution in increased to from sector 7.5% 1.2% has to in The
pool large at or availability billion by skilled, to billion operations. of billion, US$99 an NASSCOM, to increased English-speaking a revenue by sector and exports, interested domestic of demand sector consumers low-cost, increased According over stood to highly IT India's is in looking at where revenues 13%.The export and the – growing 2015, outsource US$48 fluent attributed specialisation, service aggregated from in in of workers their the US$147 foreign matched growth
Indian in of The to increased the from IT in the industry 2008. 4.8% GDP in 7% 2005–06 share country's
of In business listed among caters corporations. firms in were outsourcing in the services multinational seven mainly outsourcing India Western the technology operations Indian process world.The to top the 2009, 15 in industry companies outsourcing
2012, outsourcing 2.8 As in of around the sector. work million people
revenues are 1% around of GDP. Annual billion, $11 around
graduate Around in million 2.5 year. India every people
by rising result of a shortages. Wages are as percent 10–15 skill
rising in 2011. the insurance 15th the India world in 2013, market tenth-largest became in from
to a billion business the accounted in market US$66.4 total size economies, just 2% 2013, At in the world's and remains Indian of for 2017. insurance market small insurance it compared of world's major
premiums India's gross and non-life ₹6.10 trillion collected in insurance industry total insurance in billion) life 2018. (US$86
rest insurance. market insurance the is 75.41% of and for accounts insurance the general Life
guarantee business.Specialised credit 24 in are in Agriculture Credit Guarantee offer insurance. active and (AIC) companies 52 Of crop and life-insurance India, the insurers Insurance insurance Company Corporation Export
related insurance crops. products weather to introduced as innovative and has specific such several It insurance
US$8.8 billion in in in or to ₹346 ₹700 billion was the billion billion ₹425 premium billion 2019) underwritten US$9.9 The billion non-life insurers 2010–11 against (equivalent (equivalent 2019) 2009–10. by during or ₹620 to
given in was across-the-broad rates. growth the satisfactory, The cuts tariff particularly
in ₹140 billion private in US$4.0 billion underwrote or premiums (equivalent ₹290 to 2019) billion against (equivalent billion billion billion 2009–10. insurers The 2019) of or to US$3.5 in ₹174 ₹250
of insurance Indian The under-developed low insurance been had penetration. levels business with
wholesale, retail industry, contributed GDP) million The 249.94 people the in (57% and of excluding $482 of workforce) employed billion (22% 2016.
after is in industry agriculture. second The largest the employer India,
retail world one is of value. economic to Indian markets US$600 in market retail billion the The be estimated by top-five the and
and has of by the is one retail fastest-growing the to markets trillion 2020. world, projected reach $1.3 India in
billion and retail billion e-commerce shops $71.9 expected consists $32.7 to 2022.India's market industry India mostly in at street was retail local 2018, is valued vendors. mom-and-pop owner-manned of by in The stores, and reach
4% expanding, market supermarkets Retail in 2008. are a share of with
in retail the government 2012, retail. permitted 100% In single-brand 51% multi-brand in FDI and FDI
retail. of red and to back-end and state-level permits infrastructure tape warehouse However, limit lack of a continue organised growth
made measures" Compliance be open "anti-hoarding regulations for thirty as business. "signboard store licences" a such can must with and before over
state, taxes goods for are and even states. within moving from state to There
a Street spoilage. agriculture produce Journal, to infrastructure from cause lack lost be of According third networks to India's The the efficient retail Wall of and
World that its in the GDP Travel generated or 8% jobs, Council billion) (US$210 & nation's supported employment. and million Tourism 41.622 calculated The total ₹15.24 2017 of tourism trillion of 9.4%
by 6.9% trillion ₹32.05 billion) predicted (US$450 of to (9.9% GDP). to sector rate of The at 2028 annual an grow is
compared arrived a in foreign of 8.89 to recording million 2016, growth 2017 tourists 15.6%. in Over million in 10 India
tourism foreign receipts in India earned 2015. billion $21.07 exchange from in
to in 1997 million has 8.03 seen steady a India growth from 2.37 tourism in million arrivals to International arrivals 2015.
are to and the major India, international of tourists. Union The tourists European States is international of largest United while sources source nations other Japan
visit and other of Mahal, holiday visiting majority thematic Less than cultural, the the tourists circuits. with Taj international 10%
Indian sector and each million of about services international medical for year 740 health travellers.India million 12 adds tourism offering economy, tourism, long-term take trips Indian care within health has domestic fast-growing India while its Over citizens low-cost care. tourism a
to estimated was 2015, be worth tourism In sector US$3 medical October billion. the
2020. projected by $7–8 is to to grow billion It
patients to foreign seek medical 184,298 to treatment. traveled In 2014, India
2017 joint of $30.364 billion ASSOCHAM-PwC the a grow would An 2022, billion CAGR recording from that and study $52.683 media a size in of projected Indian to by 11.7%. entertainment industry
for The half industry predicted account would cinema overall over-the-top of and services the nearly period. television, the during study that also growth
ayurveda incomes, by in buoyed precedence industry of a billion, 2020, 2015 US$280 health to rising reach 2018. of to expected health India's increased at and improved and in healthcare 29% size recorded is India diseases, sector awareness, of a greater between lifestyle CAGR grow insurance.The access billion market to $4.4
16% a of estimates Industry will that at industry Confederation CAGR until grow the The Indian 2025.
services tourism the care well-being personal of for or beauty market 75% 15% ayurvedic while comprises of over-the-counter and market. products, Nearly ayurvedic accounted the
in ₹2.20 total The for billion) trillion accounting of generated revenue GDP. 2014–15, 1.94% telecommunication (US$31 in sector
is world 2016. subscribers of as by billion and mobile the second-largest fixed 31 phones) 1.053 in India of the market August number with telephone users (both
one lowest among in world, the call-tariffs has It fierce telecom to of the competition operators. due
India user-base. world's the has Internet third-largest
were there India estimates in 2016, Internet of As TV million as are 554 million there over March the in of indicate 2012. 342.65 31 subscribers that country.Industry consumers
subscribers. number of largest is the in India by market television (DTH) direct-to-home the world
there May DTH were in the country. As million 2016, of 84.80 subscribers
20.14 people $63 of the and (5% GDP) Mining workforce) 2016. million billion of employed in contributed (3%
by by of the the in was minerals world and value India's mining eighth-largest fourth-largest industry in volume, producer producer 2009.
four which minerals, energy minerals, In and 89 atomic were of fuel, it non-fuel. processed and three were 2013, 80 mined
50% concentrated Odisha, Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, is 68% accounted India's value, for of mining Karnataka. volume The production in 2011–12.Nearly industry, public Rajasthan, Pradesh mineral output Telangana, Jharkhand, and Andhra states: sector eight of government-owned Madhya by in by
of resources. value by output comes from oil and the Another offshore gas 25%
half 3,000 ore. limestone which about India in operated were and coal, of iron mines 2010,
was iron zinc being five producers India global lignite, manganese; while ore, output-value largest the basis, the other ten mica, of largest coal, producers minerals. one of On bauxite, chromite, barite, of and many of one
and 2013, the aluminium.India's vast. steel fourth-largest mineral producer resources was in of the seventh-largest producer are of India
to 2000, 2.3% employed people decreasing and has of 2.9 GDP compared – its a contributing industry percentage However, mining 2010 in of its million total labour. 3% in – declined its
net is minerals importer including coal. India many a of
administrative sustainable infrastructure, inadequate of of permit, mining resources, and is complex regulatory slow capital environmentally technologies. decline procedures, adoption shortage sector India's and of because
1991, its to intentionally India largely isolated markets, protect self-reliance. economy liberalisation achieve of and to world from was the Until and
while were trade upper-limit restricted approvals; approvals equity restrictions in quantitative sector. participation, Foreign foreign restrictions, tariffs, the on of (FDI) transfer, subject needed new and investment FDI government for and taxes by export direct was nearly was export technology obligations industrial these import to 60%
of and consisted ensured Indians. annually flows capital large million The aid, foreign only averaged and $200 deposits around of the 1985 FDI between 1991; percentage that borrowing restrictions a non-resident commercial of
consumer and period, machinery, period; neglect to the by the India's of in after materials industrialisation, consisted years imports predominantly were early independence, the that policy stagnant general 15 same raw of of with trade government due goods. first for exports
trade services the 1990–91 total and has sharply, India's of Since in in 47% of the goods trade in GDP 16% with increased to liberalisation, the 2009–10. contribution to value from rising international
in India's accounted 48.8% Foreign trade of for 2015. GDP
1.44% 3.31% 2.12% and 3.34% and trade. exports for and of commercial accounts of services for merchandise trade India of for exports of imports Globally, imports
are China, Arab India's partners Emirates. and European Union, the United major the States trading the United
gems minerals. goods, and products, products, and and included In iron petroleum other agricultural and 2006–07, jewellery, ore export pharmaceuticals, engineering chemicals garments, major commodities textiles
goods, crude and commodities electronic Major machinery, and related import products, gold oil included silver.
to year-on-year or billion trillion billion 2019), November to imports exports US$32 ₹851 were ₹2.3 trillion (equivalent (equivalent in up or increased at 2010, while ₹1.5 US$22 in billion 22.3% ₹1,251 billion to In 2019). 7.5%
2010.India to in and the billion a or to dropped its Tariffs same ₹950 and billion General is billion in month 2009 the in WTO. to successor, Trade (equivalent The Agreement deficit on billion billion founding-member ₹469 2019) or for trade (equivalent of from in billion (GATT) ₹401 2019) US$13 ₹720 US$10
India in the world. in the of its has general developing voicing participating While concerns been meetings, actively council crucial
issues to in opposition continued barriers 43rd instance, policies.India of For in inclusion non-tariff other the WTO its and index. trade has secured competitiveness to labour, India environmental place
on its has India's been Since balance account of current payments negative. independence,
1990s, economic precipitated in India's in its from liberalisation a in by Since up balance-of-payment of rose consistently, imports 2002–03, the 1990–91. 66.2% covering exports crisis, 80.3%
in the in the deceleration imports general a a 2008–09. slump 61.4% saw of percentage However, world as drop economic by trade to exports followed global
in billion, deficit, current account seen $118.7 oil bill behind the rose which as 2008–09. to GDP, driver 11.11% growing or is main import India's large the of
imported of $82.1 worth billion oil. January 2010, and crude India October Between
from to US$189 in 2011–12. deficit billion merchandise every 2002 has The of trade year Indian trade run a economy 2012, a with deficit
2008–09. billion 4.4% has to from concessional deficit, reliance about 2013.India's debt the largest liberalisation external in on decreased trade service and with in has assistance the debt China decreased in ratio $31 1990–91 Its since economy, of and the 35.3%
borrowings external government additional source lenders, are to from (ECBs), by for Indian permitted corporates. In commercial or non-resident an of funds the loans commercial being India, providing
Reserve under the (RBI) Act ECB regulates Ministry of Foreign Exchange and guidelines policy of Finance Management issued India 1999. through by Bank the monitors The them of
steadily in billion) July ₹38,832.21 risen in billion to India's have $5.8 1991 foreign reserves billion from (US$540 March exchange 2020.
announced robustness all high growth an all-time current the account 2013. In end the of deficit financial an in India, reached aid 2012, to Kingdom citing economy.India's Indian to and United
deficit overseas funded the India historically markets in by non-resident and current or through by Indians account remittances borrowings has companies portfolio inflows. its
direct since that, inflows. From through time 2016 investment deficit the funding RBI first April its 1991, data for 2017, India foreign was to showed January
that Modi's rising sign ability noted Minister foundation for Economic sustained investors country's Prime among growth". the economic the development Narendra The long-term "a of strengthen to Times in confidence was
As third-largest the terms, the PPP in economy (FDI). India in world attracted investment direct foreign has
into billion, higher FDI $36.5 than India stood year of inflow 51.1% During 2011, $24.15 2010 billion. the at figure the
technology and pharmaceuticals, auto apparels, in strengths has jewellery. other as areas information and chemicals, such India components, significant telecommunication,
a Despite surge rigid FDI policies foreign significant investments, hindrance. were a in
number a adopted FDI time, of has India reforms. Over
expertise. India of a managerial skilled and has technical large pool
2005, market.India FDI middle-class and stake the policy represents population up to FDI growing allowing size 300 a of stands liberalised 100% a ventures. in The at its in million consumer
restrictions technology foreign reforms easy facilitated expansion and and access industrial on investment. removed policy licensing to requirements, have substantially reduced Industrial
curve economy of regime. liberalised credit sector real-estate owes the and booming The FDI some upward a growth to
and amended to city- construction hospitals, premises, comprising FDI March rules educational allow in the recreational facilities, infrastructure development regional-level commercial government sector, 100% infrastructure. the and 2005, housing, institutions, including the In and projects construction built-up
2014, billion telecom, the country attracted defence, 2010, aviation, to and retail, $178 2012 sectors.From Between reforms India to as extended FDI. these 2000 oil, other and
between double effectively through inordinately advantages a international is tax to Mauritius the is investment to India Mauritius a routing significant given and a due – channel. capital taxation tax zero-taxation FDI and gains country tax due treaty Mauritius, The funds is avoided from haven, creating high of
India. between in for inflows investment foreign the GDP in accounted years, and direct 21 FDI in the 2017 2016 hit last $60.1 billion has FDI 2015.As of across three sectors India's 87 2.1% eased rules government
overseas, Indian outside companies Since jobs creating FDI have and expanded investing 2000, India.
companies to cent From Indian per its GDP. India 2006 FDI by outside amounted of 2010, to 1.34
States, deployed companies Indian have Africa. the started in United FDI operations and and Europe
largest The private-sector employer. Kingdom's Tata manufacturer Indian is and United the company
to India, and accepted also legal of only tender The (₹) tender in rupee. the currency and which as Indian is the that rupee their legal Nepal in is neighbouring Bhutan, of both Indian peg
into 100 paise. is divided The rupee
The note; in circulation is highest-denomination ₹2,000 coin. is paise the the coin the banknote 50 lowest-denomination
be ceased 50 paise currency. denominations to June Since 2011, 30 below all have legal
India system central the Reserve bank. India's (RBI), by the monetary Bank country's managed is of
and regulator of to April 1 serves of foreign banker 1949, custodian an supervisor and on in nation's exchange of the Established as and government, RBI monetary system, authority, the monetary the the currency. as reserves, nationalised issuer 1935
a a central by the Government of who board by India. appointed governor governed by It is directors, of headed is
the are by The set rates interest Committee. Policy benchmark Monetary
to through pound until 1975 to exchange was dollar a from 1946, the British 1927 rupee linked rate. US and The then to fixed the
four yen It fixed dollar, Mark. par the replaced rate pound, September international Deutsche British currencies: in the and of 1975 a with basket system and devalued was Japanese was of the major US the the
largest partner, after by the July. trading 1991, its devalued was of the major and Union, two around stages In on crisis India Soviet exchange the 2 foreign rupee faced in 19% 1 collapse and the
In (LERMS) Exchange introduced. Liberalized Rate Mechanism 1992, a was
surrender the the 40 exchange foreign could exporters the at to the RBI-determined Under exchange their had remaining to at market-determined rate; percent RBI be converted LERMS, exchange of rate. earnings 60%
convertibility some of with the to market account capital current forces. 1991 the on rupee 1994, largely rupee in sharp was controls.After by the convertible transition devaluation account, in current been has the determined value and In 1994, the
during fairly has 2000–2010. the The decade rupee stable been
October In rupee US to all-time low touched dollar. the an 74.90 2018,
and Bank poverty proposed basis calculation In and to measuring its reviewed the purchasing-power-parity World revisions 2005 methodology poverty. of May for 2014,
the poverty India. million 872.3 million below line, people revised had lived of which world methodology, the new the 179.6 to in According
2013. 17.5% 20.6% India With world's share of of a world's population, total in poorest had the
India chronically 2005–2006 children about According the age to a malnourished. under of million 5 survey, who were 61 had
stated ranks that in age UNICEF that successive alleviate India between metric.Since met have a achieved 5 on 1960s, report success. implemented various and poverty, planning, countries percent early now to schemes 188 have mortality A the of under under central and with rates, this governments 46th 2010, 2011 1990 partial 45 reduction
in In to Employment (MGNREGA), Mahatma rural of enacted government days Guarantee Gandhi districts every the the 2005, National household guaranteeing India. Act employment wage all of Rural 100 minimum the
source poor 2011, the unintended of beset for built and controversy of quality deficit corrupt officials, was the and effects. widely programme, destructive it funds, financing In criticised infrastructure under as with
the has suggest Other some poverty reduce in programme cases. that studies helped rural
report and other been in sustainable though employment a Yet studies driver has poverty economic of sizeable poverty. population that the reduction, growth remains India's
recording ranked poverty sanitation such of of 102nd categorized Global as strong reductions poverty 2006 2016, values during severity. the as cooking fastest 2019 India the in Hunger nutrition.On countries), out India areas with 'serious' the lifted the 117 and being improvements assets, people multidimensional (out million Index 271 in index and in between fuel, period
in about workforce total of accounted sectors and Agricultural 52.1% for allied 2009–10. the
have and has of services which a employment of employed, 20.3% percentage labour in time accounting seen infrastructure growth for employment includes over in construction fallen While steady 2012–13. agriculture
total 7% are in government-controlled of the the sector. workforce, sector, which in public organised Of two-thirds is the
in workforce the About self-employed. 51.2% of is India
is salaries. survey, and employment According a gender in 2005–06 a to gap there
women are self-employed, primarily in agriculture. men In rural both mostly areas, and
chronic in In urban for largest in of India source is and work both 2006.Unemployment unemployment. the (disguised) areas, men women was by characterised employment salaried
poverty skills, of starting to schemes decades search honing – by Government up recent of unskilled and in solve eradication that reservations urban sector and target for governments, people in enterprises, livelihoods providing areas assistance the – unemployment millions of poor has into etc. financial problem sent setting both businesses, in which attempt public
for created better underlined The reforms. education for need on political to public further after liberalisation, in organised sector role focusing of pressure employment, further has the the due decline decreased and the
employment government analysts to by standards, have developing and modify heavy, urged for generation. environment conducive more or country abolish make to regulations are even the the India's labour them
for be environment to other five-year 11th reducing by number congenial permissions and created need for required. also the The clearances has plan identified generation, of the bureaucratic employment a
the reaching sectors of obstacle, the prevents and complex which in system is in is education inadequacies been a in opportunities Inequalities have society.Child benefits as employment identified problem poverty. India all from of an labour that increased rooted
a the child the programs variety to of implemented government eliminate labour. has Since 1990s,
These cells, programs, up setting included special school have creating free lunch launching etc. schools, investigation
Sonalde studies few of overall, but have on industries in recent are child found children Indian employed, India Author relatively Desai which that are some pockets stated in labour children employed.
below rare. of Child labour now 10 age is the
9% surveys as of their 16 around sowing for of whom 10–14 largest families. latest million work assisting another wage, harvesting of the the back an rural funds high the while to work remit demand 2% children many within world, the in such and their In diaspora overseas times of has group, find and home work their farms estimated crops.India parents or only age working people,
of largest of expat employment the Middle region is source Indians. The East
infrastructure crude industry Indians. employs Saudi The expat and million over oil Arabia of production 2
another construction boom Indians such Cities the in Emirates 2 Abu decades. United employed Dubai million Dhabi have in Arab during and recent as
the or low 1%. ₹4.5 share at in 2009–10, world, billion US$63 but stood 2019), remittances billion to their ₹2,500 in from FDI In migrants trillion at (equivalent Indian the remained overseas around in highest
India. pervasive problem been has in a Corruption
get those had bribe office in previous study by half A paying influence in more a peddling year. that than job of to done public a first-hand a or (TI) International Transparency the surveyed of 2005 found experience
found be percent. in study rate A 40 to this 2008 follow-up
In amongst countries in levels at 2011, place perceived public India 95th sector ranked of 183 TI corruption.
suggested reduction and tape, institutionalised in cause red By for the as improved were 1996, corruption the India bureaucracy to ranking a place.In Licence Raj and its 2016, corruption a 79th inefficiency. and saw
excessive transparent lack and recent causes processes. mandated approval certain spending discretionary goods institutions, monopoly programs, of by reports the of of bureaucracy requirements, and with suggest providers powers, regulations service and More corruption include and laws government-controlled
opened and budgets. which the government – state and action citizens its recipients, by avenues various commissions, Indian or Right most 2005 grievances.In of fails large Computerisation – furnish to information Act considerably requested to have Information requires corruption services, as spending officials government concluded bureaucracy intended consumes to inefficient redress the punitive to the that face and 2011, central reach reduced vigilance and
medical found rates of 40% are workplace. public the not that found sector one of the government-owned 25% public-sector absence teachers study and among India's be the in worst workers at could world;
stashed scientists, meritocratic with demands a there banks. issues in with transparency, an money black list almost and Indian are India topped oversee agencies alleging 2006 for worldwide billion economy, a with Similarly, science that the facing and system, an for bureaucratic underground that has Swiss many technology.India overhaul the of report $1,456
external amount to total 13 country's would debt. times the This
been allegations Banking Association. denied by the Swiss have These
opposition explain circles, be the a produce suggested James Nason, Banking Indian used picked and Swiss a International of have rapidly story fabrication. media Association, truth. Swiss and forced published report. figures this never in However, figures source such money) Association gospel the Indian circulated them." claiming should were methodology the as for in Head such (for "The Bankers to Communications up India) identify the was to their Anyone complete to and (black The
notes 2016, 8 2000 by new taken demonetization black economy. money and notes) Prime 500 bank recent and by 1000 November to Modi, involved rupee the step (replaced rupee Minister on all return of A 500 into the
primary has attendance progress and increasing literacy population. approximately the India to rate the three-fourths education made of expanding
literacy 52.2% to in 74.04% 1991 had grown from rate 2011. India's in
eighty-sixth rights enacted to the the Amendment been one 2002, the all legislation and to of elementary under providing free further level children. been fundamental of The has objective at right to education has made of education
from drop-out and lower the country is 74% high However, the worldwide suffers rate. the average rate of than literacy a
gender, Literacy and by rates rural areas, and urban region, and social different educational among vary groups. opportunities
four more times are to the poorest higher in than rates three advanced India's states. in Poverty states those
only of it in India's has states. than the While countries per $1,410 poorest $294 among just poorest world's capita middle-income – Uttar of was Pradesh annual $436 India's 2011 Brazil) Bihar, and (which one it average in placing the in people – more income was
regional in critical infrastructure availability socio-economic growing India's of and variations India's development. among and facing territories sharp different terms the and states poverty, of is economy problem A
to and Pradesh Assam, are states Pradesh, Madhya than Nagaland, – one-third Six low-income India's Odisha Uttar Chhattisgarh, population. – home of more
states in the income, distributing in pre-liberalisation living the exist and literacy among of expectancy life regions especially across attempted reduce interior encouraging Severe development to industrial industries rates, conditions.The disparities regional era, in states. five-year by disparities plans, terms and
been and effective increased results measures growth. industrial these as discouraging inefficiency The have hampered
skilled infrastructure manufacturing liberalisation, well-developed sectors. and have been workforce, which states more educated The better benefit attract placed an advanced service and to from and with the
tax tried less-advanced and sectors. than reduce other like cheap tourism states on can develop land, by Governments sectors have focused holidays of and faster offering to which disparities
United Development indicating coefficient Africa. be Nations to America according 33.9, India's and Latin Asia, overall distribution (UNDP), Program is East income Gini uniform more income than to the
debate Global 48% individuals.There estimated by or total that is expansion wealth been India's The of on India's World Wealth, Review report, a has high-net published economic whether held by Migration New pro-poor 2019 was Wealth anti-poor. continuing worth
been poverty India. reduced has pro-poor that in growth has suggest and Studies economic
in of launch the (BSE) development exchange Exchange began 1894. Bombay security of July with 1875 Stock Stock Indian Ahmedabad The in and the markets
then, Indian have in Since 22 cities. exchanges other traded
stock India's South market 2014, Korea just Australia. capitalisation, In the 10th by those became above of the largest world and market exchange in
public compared Stock a to National according exchanges, of as US$1.68 BSE Exchange market India's market Exchanges.The NYSE been of offering of US$1.4 has 2012. US$1.71 and small 2015, and in billion World and US$300 in to and trillion had trillion of NASDAQ, 2013 stock India Federation (IPO) major two in India, February million initial capitalisation raising
Ernst IPO slow processes government that market the & stated reflects complex low and regulations. activity approval Young conditions,
completing not were their internationally companies IPO 2013, India. list to Indian without securities an in allowed Before first
overseas, domestically, to now they and security were choose list Indian can these concurrently. reformed companies laws both In want 2013, or where first:
equity increase liquidity to Further, overseas investors and companies, for international listings already-listed private laws to security ease Indian have been companies. of revised in
India India increases India in of partners NITI of impact companies the India Startup Advisory – of trading largest Economic of pandemic in a in program encourage in in development Economic of India the Oil India Council IndiaLists: List COVID-19 List in megaprojects Aayog Demonetization companies Make India since price Natural Economic in unions List Late-2000s of India Trade India manufacturing government of recession to 2003 resources List IndiaEvents: largest of
and Programme at Industry Ministry CIA OECD profile at India Statistics World profile of the India of Bank Commerce Finance India Ministry Ministry and – World The Factbook Implementation of
in of of largest the world terms 42nd is nominal of product. purchasing domestic largest terms power parity the The in Pakistan economy and in 23rd gross (PPP),
(the capita capita a world's over PPP which of the 154th and giving world 132nd GDP Pakistan million in per which nominal the giving in GDP population per 2019. a of 2019, 2019, 220 ranks of it 5,839 it in for $1,357 world 5th-largest), a in ranks has
economy its to when of Pakistan's undocumented not overall However, taken 36% estimated be which capita is is per into calculating income. consideration economy,
by world's economies century. Pakistan developing with countries 21st largest one having O'Neill is potential research a BRICS the becoming, Jim high the paper of among the the along and a Next in as is identified countries, of in a Eleven country
River. with along economy Indus the of semi-industrialized, is centres growth The
centers sports lesser and are situated coexisting urban in Primary the and parts textiles, diversified with of of economies Punjab, leather goods, other the commodities Pakistan's major developed economy chemicals include in poles the export the carpets/rugs.Growth Karachi along River; areas goods, country. of Indus
political mixed a foreign suffered the disputes, past in from investment. has The of levels internal population, economy fast-growing
expansion are draw trade dampen by – current could bolstered a by in growing worker gap reserves and the Foreign outstrips steady a export as import growth exchange growth down medium term. deficit GDP driven account widening reserves – but remittances,
is government Pakistan corporations, process and aimed liberalization, decrease budget economic privatization including currently of undergoing to investment deficit. all a attract foreign of
on outlook led has & October long-term foreign crossed by Poor's. $24.0 currency Standard rating 2016, to In reserves billion stable which the
Pakistan be May report rates lowest named particular manufacturing as growth in ten economies one the emerging Asia. that hub.As In 2.9%, South a 2019, BMI future the has predicted focus on will of IMF Research of its 2016, with
64.3% in the Pakistan 2014. poverty in fell World 29.5% to 2002 in Bank, from According to
The debt macroeconomic worsening led has country's "negative". outlook to position Pakistan's to downgrading Moody's
terms Pakistan's 2017, GDP of $1 trillion. in purchasing power parity crossed In
undergone US vis-a-vis year-on-year 30% the the had depreciation of By Pakistani Dollar. a 2019, rupee May
In Pakistan grow as the States markets in days Asian Company the that United stronger and Atlantic rapidly of ahead. during relatively Media expected it 2016, (AMC) will has the economy ranked South a
100 index achieved (KSE) point 100 6.67% that Indian Karachi during was Exchange index period point the said AMC Stock January–July of year, while percent. 17 this had
to and vulnerable internal unstable and has Pakistan's been the characterised highly external as shocks. economy
military drought Pakistan proved the the the a Afghanistan, sanctions the of to was adverse history, Colin the refugees of Asian four events action period influx be with into 2001–2002; of according from the in face a massive – worst — – post-9/11 The multiple to about resilient to "sanctioned crisis; a country; in eyeballs"; four-year years; concentrated However, that Powell, lasting in Pakistan's recession economic neighbouring unexpectedly (1998–2002) global economy financial severe
reforms substantial best to decade. since prospects the Pakistani sources, a has government many are for and According creation nearly economic poverty medium-term 2000, made the and job reduction in
the making that and – replacing traders." license a In region requirement two-year corporate reformer Bank property, and World the reported reducing reformer 2005, start number to every governance for register cost for easier to the shipment was it to licences violating globally in 10 a the penalties "Pakistan top with duration the rules, business, increasing
The a a jump of Business (WB) globe, and Bank and continuous indicating International from Corporation's Ease improvement around ranked Finance World among last the flagship 136 report 2020 108 countries Doing year. Pakistan Index 190 taking
ventures a from shares and improvement giants Mobil like like JW Korean's dollar many Korea.With with doing to oil has Mushtaq US countries agreement Zealand, South of Denmark, market Arabia commitments after in giving ranking local Motors.US and are Malaysia Saudi Gwadar Renault, German and potential gas new auto investments in from to Qatar, Motors manufacturers an reserves map Singapore, Farooque Motors, are and top The auto considering offshore.With for and Exxon more come and United recent gap France's its Hyundai 15 auto with Chinese investment ease Khalid UAE, more this mega showing joint in has five and 25% hydrocarbon billion again returned giant a government, friendly sector offshore giant way South oil acquired industry on Dewan at through drilling of decades 2018, in in Italy. road survey three nearly huge to sector and and Pakistan New Forland entry initial invest business Kong Hong from establishing especially in than May Kia, petrochemical refinery discovery in were Volkswagen Pakistan
To in and boost of unstable announced country. foreign-exchange $3 reserves, invest Pakistan's form the billion the direct Qatar investments deposits to
June million the to first Qatar the 2019, $500 By of Pakistan. sent end
economic the indicators Fiscal 2020. These from to 2004 Year are Pakistan of
Statistics. is Bureau of Data from Pakistan
of Data Ministry from is PBS. and Finance
of from Pakistan Data is Statistics. Bureau
Data is Ministry of from Finance.
Ministry is Finance. of Data taken from
from Investor + Domestic + = = PSEs Debt External Gross + Debt Gross from Debt the Total (Federal+Provincial) Private Government = IMF (Federal+Provincial) + Debt / Gross Sector + Direct + Public Government + Liabilities PSEs Operations Public Debt External Debt Intercompany External Public – in Public Government Banking Domestic Debt External Debt System. Government Public of Net Debt Commodity Debt + Debt abroad Debt External Total Debt Deposits
Total IMF of External Liabilities + = External Debt from Private Debt Exchange Sector included) Banks Public Investors + taken External Government to is state Public Direct Debt + Public Debt (Foreign not + from = Liabilities Data Debt + External Debt are Enterprises Sector bank Pakistan.
bank Data of State is taken Pakistan. from
SBP Ministry taken of Data and Finance. from is
was as international in the declared Week". of stock Index magazine the the best-performing the first twenty-first "Business market century, four Pakistan's world In KSE index years by 100 the
companies Pakistan 2005 in Bank. $5,937 by The the in capitalisation million valued at listed was stock of market World
steep the political the Karachi of current resulted Exchange. deficits But Stock and in of the after account and in western decline rising mounting uncertain Elections, General country, along inflation the environment, militancy 2008, borders
corporate a of result, As the sector recent times. declined dramatically Pakistan in has
and the trend 2009 market 2011. back continues strongly bounced the in in However,
100 resulting shot banking that in heavy market uncharted banks from to 2014 a close announced the after in Index Negative past sector. was at the into this 30,000-point upgrading burst the points of (3.1%) high, territories barrier Stable, By 5 outlook days the as major record the benchmark KSE 907 stock Pakistani Moody's new it rose and buying to came
supported and in was oil cement gas sectors. The the and rally buying heavy by
expertise strong unified exchanges technological the market stock necessary aimed a to for and a On January case fragmentation Stock Exchange Lahore Stock into attracting Stock Islamabad reduce create for inducted 11 and strategic Exchange. providing Exchange, including Exchange 2016, Karachi help were Stock three partnerships all Pakistan
confirmed to indexes Frontier In Emerging its provider index has Stock that stock Exchange semi-annual has Pakistan Markets May 2017 from (PSX) reclassified the review. analysis and American MSCI been market in Markets tools, of
the exchange's to Index 636.96 of reclassification market emerging an points, another Index an 52,387.87. recorded end at 1.23%, propelled over when the PSE-100 the milestone stock or past as increase Euphoria
47000 fiscal showed market at last In a the points year of growth 7.1% average. fiscal and the stock at the 2018, over year negative stood
that income middle purchase may of the as classes. Pakistan's as of based now estimates suggested population 2017, largely had citing consumption according many Journal, the and to on goods, and Wall upper of 42% As to belong Street
broad then these are larger or If numbers correct, in of size and 87 classes, upper a any indicative million which population belong Pakistanis even that middle to sense, than Germany. is the
over that the households 15 years. motorcycle grown washing also impressively that past machines the Official own a of proportion and figures has show
2016. 174.9 in Consumer points increase Confidence Furthermore, 2017, the recorded Index highest-ever 17 from January of an July level showing of IBA-SBP points its
Separately, an during billion financing of of half increase fiscal year 2017. first posted the of current Rs37.6 consumer
personal segment, as continued to while showed dominated loans the a Auto well. finance pickup be
witnessed is half highest half-year the of credit in personal 2017 stated. a report about figure the year decade," net Rs13.7 fiscal loans off-take of the "The of first billion in
entering high decades few young very ensured of has The large now people growth the that population a are labor market. past in number the
six Asian Even it the populous though most is nations. among
tape excessive difficult. from hiring, In the red firing and jobs, past, made consequently
now underground the in in operate reforms to are not economy. has many business that ensured firms compelled taxation Significant and progress
Fee opportunities, a probability Loan young for Prime economic of remarkable and government enabling in Interest Skill Talented Students, This combat Youth are Minister’s Reimbursement of Loan to segment the Youth to "In took Minister’s includes to Prime announcing better schemes Prime Prime Prime IT which of Development a and unemployment by 2016 access the Laptops Program, Prime gainful Youth broad needed poor training a Minister’s Program on-the-job Youth of canvas to Training employment, Scheme,Prime program employment Minister’s productive graduates improve empowerment, youth has six to Minister’s Provision Minister’s imparting Youth Scheme". Prime getting Program country. Program Minister's Business acquiring for job. skills initiative Scheme, schemes Free Scheme, the get for society Minister’s
are from Government Armed health. contributing and also people provincial forces 4.5 to employed to local and governments education federal, employment in in million according by different and sectors is estimate sector
has "next the industry's big tourism as in being stated Tourism thing". Pakistan been
the with almost diverse to million country, has landscapes, its ago. of that Pakistan, and double people a attracted to tourists 90 decade cultures,
the tourists the Parbat terribly tourist tourism the Due of 2013 gradually and of effected shooting adversely of has foreigner threat Nanga shock terrorism has declined to industry. number
albeit has in As 2016 gradually. to of Pakistan, tourism recover begun
the with between Government, of four powers is Federal the of of a Federal revenue the department 86% Although the division collection. constitutional and board Government the almost Revenue, national provinces, of country taxation the Federation entire the collects Federal tax
trillion the 3.842 trillion target Federal 2017–2018. in rupees Revenue of fiscal taxes Board The against the rupees year collected 3.935 of revised in
Rs.1,946 billion. 2013, In FY collection was FBR tax
its a achievement. So years phenomenal double is tax it only 5 revenue which in almost
versus the century, large value the dollar rupee pushed until depreciated dollar. the rupee of Pakistani 21st Pakistan's the the of US current-account against start when up the around The surplus
buying order then preserve by stabilised competitiveness in dollars, export to bank lowering country's and Pakistan's interest rates the central
State of Bank reserves Pakistan. with foreign maintains Pakistan
the dollar of 2005, losses reserves speculated Hussain then the to currency fell step solely incurring The SBP Governor US after dollar during down. forcing Ishrat prices the was
an issued official diversification In the of year statement ratio in reserves including withholding SBP proclaiming the and currencies diversification. Yen, of Euro same
had country's on crude by gone that reported 11 and State oil Pakistan million the pressure the reserves Bank exchange and Pakistan's Following foreign international could $571.9 million. crisis in down to spikes $7749.7 not credit of October economy 2008, the prices, withstand
more $6.59 billion. to level a had exchange by The $10 of foreign billion reserves declined
Pakistan its in financial on June of was 2013 commitments. on brink default the
an were of Forex covering low reserves worth historic only weeks' Country's two at imports.
at 2020, Pakistan's b. reserves stood US$11.503 Foreign January exchange In
53% in 1947. about accounted GDP for Agriculture of
of of While of roughly it been then, agricultural output the the the dropped has grown has agriculture one-fifth per-capita Pakistan's economy. outpaced since non-agricultural has by sectors, share and to growth
and advertising, industries apparel, as services In and transportation, finance). in textiles, recent telecommunications, and (such growth (such the seen country years, as cement) has rapid
than the value of and crops of important The sugarcane, wheat, are account together rice, most which more cotton, total output. crop 75% for
is crop wheat. Pakistan's food largest
and FAOSTAT. wheat, almost than all America to all produced of more 26,674,000 according tonnes) Africa of South million 2017, to the million equal tonnes In (25.9 (27.1 tonnes), of Pakistan
record to year. corresponding last the as 2018/19 the 4 In rice MMT compared of of exported million previous a 4.5 market tonnes during year Pakistan period around
harvest use droughts. occasional its is adversely in also years of a pesticides exporter, dramatically.Pakistan dangerous net is has cut when affected except by Pakistan food the
and cotton, (especially Mangoes), consumer fruits foods. vegetables vegetable fish, Oranges and wheat, imports rice, and Pakistan pulses and oil, exports
Asia's milk market, camel and largest second-largest cotton, and third-largest and is The onion market market. country ghee apricot
of of share economic importance its since 53%. when declined around agriculture has was The GDP independence,
assistance many increased agricultural expanded and prices including of agriculture harvest the commodities the for introduced support availability government of policies, credit. poor agricultural 1993, Following
has averaged growth agricultural 1993 From to about declined but in since to real the 5.7% sector 1997, 4%.
role oil in central government's reforms, package. production, play Agricultural and a reform seed wheat including increased economic the
population, Majority on indirectly, of the or dependent directly this sector.
Product of force It Gross and contributes of foreign labor percent 18.5% employed accounts (GDP) earnings. source largest the of for 37.4% is Domestic and about exchange
year's last 2.18 and recorded sector growth percent 3.5 of remarkable agriculture growth its of a percent percent. growth of 3.70 During targeted and surpassed 2017–18,
except maize. major their a the crops All showed in production positive trend
82.1 their surpassed million with level rice 7.4 and respectively. and production historic tons Sugarcane
million of thus 6.1% growth Statistics Bureau provisionally 2018 7,764,218 year the over last valued the this for year. registering at Pakistan sector the Rs. of
Again hit 2018–19, only 0.85%. and sector in not growth its did grew target by Agriculture
maize their Major except previous crops year below output. and fell wheat
in last the arable commodities Pakistan's are resources principal water. and Pakistan's are land 3 natural years : Top fiscal productions
Pakistan's of area land one and world. by largest irrigation in is cultivation of under the is systems watered total the 25% About
irrigates times Pakistan more Russia. acres than three
Pakistan warmth. from agriculture benefits year also round
for GDP accounts employs Agriculture about 42.3% 18.9% and labour force. of the about of
of technical development Zarai financial Limited Taraqiati sector expertise. institution is services of through agriculture the largest the financial towards provision and geared Bank
a is for endowed very is for as significant promising prospecting/exploration mineral mineral deposits. Pakistan with resources and emerging area
more demonstrates and geological information, available outcrops deposits. metallic country's for Based than area varied km² on 6,00,000 of the non-metallic mineral potential
and provinces constitution In of exploit the amendment in are free the 18th mineral the to jurisdiction. to explore the resources their wake all which are
sector share industrial and in Mining 2.8%. 13.19% and its quarrying contributes is GDP in
year. growth of 3.04% quarrying Pakistan by and last the negative grew in against −0.38% 2018 mining sector
of mining exploration evidence In by government agencies deposits. presents ample recent well by the sizeable as of occurrences minerals companies multinational past, as the
cover have area Recent Punjab new exploration. shield for minerals zones of thick discoveries metallic by underlain the covered alluvial in opened the by sulphide vistas oxidised province, of a zone thick
Pakistan base industrial for large a has minerals.
having deposits of alternative 175 impetus an has over of it coal reserves source in as Thar the province The tonnes billion energy. of Sindh an to develop discovery at given
dimension vast and potential for There precious stones. is
years given fiscal principal in is 5 Extraction last below minerals table :- in of the the
of approximately GDP. sector 18.17% Pakistan's accounts industrial for
of 5.43% growth compared In a as the 2018 5.80% of to in 2017. recorded it growth
industrial largest 12.13% accounting approximately for of Pakistan's GDP. of the Manufacturing is sectors,
slaughtering components the contributes in scale sub-sector further (LSM) including of three percent in manufacturing Manufacturing large-scale share 13.8 sector, 6.5 manufacturing the divided is in while manufacturing percent with manufacturing manufacturing. sector, 79.6% is in share small percent
tobacco, primarily include chemicals, processing in oil, surgical. Major medical food sectors edible fertiliser, and machinery, sugar, instruments, steel, industries cement,
the government accelerated. proportion and output, one units, overall large-scale private the sector instruments.The the industrial industrial is output exporters while sector) of shrinking privatizing public largest (including for and in surgical of is has manufacturers a industrial growth accounts Pakistan of
base industries. export and to industrial the policies bolster Government diversify country's aim
sector fastest-growing Scale is Large Manufacturing in economy. the Pakistani
food and paper products construction beverages, Industries clothing, fertiliser, include Major refineries, cement, oil processing, shrimp. materials, products, dairy textiles,
the in annual to employment for survey opportunities entrepreneurs. is Pakistan, share generating SMEs workers GDP contribution SMEDA Economic GDP and significant reports, the of and the in according a skilled Pakistan have In SMEs total significant likewise 40%
80% and the 90% non-agricultural scale in Pakistan force. and firms the of employ all medium of labor nearly represent enterprises Small
indicate figures corporations and further sector.Pakistan's the potential These in power in growth generation/distribution utilities this like involved are and largest gas, telecommunication: oil, mostly
million 1947, inherited had four capacity with a tons. In cement total Pakistan 0.5 of plants
not 1976–77 country pace and place in to the imports to continued so and could 1956–66 in until do the took resort expansion to with economic of keep cement had 1994–95. Some but development
the exchequer above contributing the billion 30 is Rs The form taxes. of plants 27 in sector consisting of cement national to
tons because metric of is demand real estate mainly cement by 2013, sector, 7,708,557 cement. of countries 2013 exported boosting and However, Afghanistan Pakistan from In Pakistan's fast-growing
42,636,428 tons cement capacity of installed Pakistan has metric metric clinker. of and of tons 44,768,250
sector the economy. most 2012–2013 of became cement profitable in industry the Pakistan In
grossed over 2013. communication billion (ICT) industry technology The information $4.8 in
by expected billion 2018. is It the mark exceed to $13
industry's export A software booming are in an increase figures potential. indication marked this of
estimated billion. total of IT total to is and industry of size the The 1306 number IT companies $2.8 increased
the 30th was for Services Index A.T. offshoring. by In Pakistan for Global location best was as rated and Location the the in Kearney first featured 2007, time
20th. 2009, ten places its had By reach Pakistan rank improved by to
are online Pakistan report, Pakistan According among marketplaces Startup 1 nations. there mainly Elance, Guru, freelancers top Upwork, million freelancer that 5 world's via Fiverr, to working – count Pakistan and freelancing about famous from
that billion shows bank Pakistan by of good annual ($) Pakistan which 1 updated IT of cross Industry. An Pakistan State achievement report a is Export IT
Also, Freelance Pakistan this official said an year. that revenue ($) generate 1 community billion
IT worldwide. billion Pakistan makes 2 Overall export ($)
have facilities was defence of Pakistan, the Production, September production that patchwork independence. of and military the of Ministry coordinate The under promote Defence since in 1951 to industry developed created
and participating production aircraft, combat Khalid is in currently many 2, as projects such submarines. It joint navy actively advance ships Al trainer aircraft,
40 Pakistan $20 to million manufacturing annually. in over countries, bringing and weapons is selling
with between arms 27pc country's by imports. percent and the USA 2004–2008 the 119 China imports providing of Pakistan's 2009–13, 54pc and increased The
in of Textile Industry Punjab. established the is Most
the different; in 1990, was Karachi. Before was the industry most of situation
etc. Yarn, cost articles raw and exporting producing most traditional and in e.g. low Cotton, Textile conservative, fabric of Pakistan Raw industry is
branded of finished nominal. is articles Share goods and
infrastructure. due Pakistan to quadruple Chinese to existing textile with export, its and production its emerging potential a has markets and
clothing conditions States accounts Pakistan's workers by regarding is of textiles of other for imports sector textile form 70% covered are but 10% deplorable. exports, and Pakistan.The the of United of working
Small sometimes children. employment do not sign do not workshops employ generally respect and the contracts, manufacturing minimum wage
wage. of workers minimum superiors where or among also by their insulted paid Violations the major law be beaten, brands, may of below subcontractors labour international occur
died in to safety 2012, leading a workers with not standards, Karachi factory. Factories in fire a do 255 accidents: at comply
out country's labour the supervising in control. 300,000 inspectors With textile 547 of factories, Pakistan the industry is
export industrial workers in which by trade protected zones. prohibited are unions, are Nor
in or of of "workers creation Elsewhere, the are threats violence, trade intimidation, victims involved dismissals". unions
accounts for of service 60.2% GDP. about sector Pakistan's
and for finance, and wholesale and Transport, trade 30%. this sector, storage, communications, about 24% insurance account retail of
service such industries tax and through holidays. as modern promote incentives is other long-term Pakistan industry information to the trying
deregulation sector an the the After has telecommunication of the exponential growth. seen industry,
Forbes successful US$1 billion Company conglomerate Ltd in sales emerged in as over Pakistan has Telecommunication 2005. with a 2000
world. exploded one to million highest users the 140 in entire in subscriber 2003 The the teledensities market reach July telephone 2017, of of a has base many-fold mobile since mobile
over remotest addition, WLL the even there areas. 6 fibre-optic and in 100% landlines are coverage million the via in network with In country
had Pakistan in Bank subscribers Telenor, mobile days Ufone Telenor it Netherland) connection Norway) Pakistan, By estimates prestigious following As are million phone of 2008. phone the 2009, Pakistan.In Jazz Pakistan/UAE) in award subscribers PTCL Pakistan 25 (Parent: million to China) the – GSM March reported 2006.The in won takes Association the operators: World China more Zong (Etisalat), in (Parent: result, a top mobile Government 3 period VEON, about a (Parent: get than Pakistan Leadership Mobile, same (Parent: that the 91
the Wireless to using lines, as million are as 2.4 many In connections. Loop fixed while addition 3.1 Local million
the Ericsson, than popular brands foreign Sony billion attracted Pakistani investments. LG has Samsung in liberalisation, remain and more Motorola telecom years, the four along Nokia most past $9 with and over the customers.Since among sector
Direct the in the alone 2007–08, of – Pakistani 30% foreign During communication total received sector (FDI) country's investment. billion $1.62 direct Investment about Foreign
of infrastructures deregulation years telecoms of during four sector been Present PTA's growth and in of result state-of-the-art implementation vision has the last the policy. the the the
and Paging freely. (cellular) were telephones mobile and adopted early
the led Cellular providers proliferation private to adopted policy and through that of service phones adoption. a were with Internet rather fast a the laissez-faire
unparalleled of increase population, large and in has society Internet With number the an seen rapid in ISPs, a and Pakistani revolution communications. English-speaking users a
to through were messages and the Pacific billion the across 2008/2009 Asia According sent systems PC of Year a New text 6.37 Christmas World, period. Acision messaging over total
of five SMS highest ranker one with with amongst the million traffic Pakistan top 763 was messages. the
the 9.3 first 3G August of the world in technology offers that country 2010, EVDO's became experience maximum Mbit/s. to speeds Pakistan 14 RevB On
through 4G on and SMRA was Auction. launched Pakistan April simultaneously 2014 in 3G 23 a
Mobilink Ufone, of Three Telenor 3G licence as a China while got a 4G 3G i.e. as Zong well got Five licence. Companies Mobile's out and
and participate their But to launched services fifth the auction 2G due Company Telecom Technology first Whereas not company, 4G. to Warid 4G existing spectrum from world's on terms LTE 1800 procedure, Pakistan 2G in transform to they became directly neutral MHz did
Pakistan With that and the 4G 3G world. joined
December rapidly. 2017, been reached In broadband the subscriber increasing in millions.Pakistan broadband of in and the of to growth as Pakistan has in ranked is terms base world, subscribers 4G 4th 46 3G Internet Internet
analysis, research Global global released rankings Topic centre. a broadband Point The by are
Pakistan users million more 2009. has than in Internet 20
the to to potential 1 thus to The of said years million 50 is 5 have a potential phone in million connections mobile country up nearly absorb next users Internet month. per a
main websites. Almost departments, own organisations and government have their institutions of the all
search and of instant engines The is messaging booming. services use also
of over world. Internet, on Pakistanis ardent some communicating are users with chatters all the the the most
example, to leading huge arranged marriages. have use for of services, in the marriage increase the tradition seen years Recent a a major of online re-alignment of
to 114.6 impact had million dropped cellular an the base reverification of subscriber on when Biometric from 139.9 2015 million. count in adverse SIMs subscribers
through fast to reached the the industry for at to regain tough Pakistan 2018–19 report subscribers pace.According :- FY the continues of released PTA has the at Total and a teledensity However, period survived by 77.7%.
revenues billion. Rs. to were reached Telecom 551.9
exchequer 95.8 RS. national sector telecom was to of Total billion. the contribution
millions. to (Jazz), the subscribers.Pakistan mobile August released 87 sector were to US$635.3 companies in Ufone 2020 and phone nearly approximately figures Broadband of August there subscribers including reached Zong the the country telecom Authority phone Telecommunication came the was Investment million.as with operating cell 169 in in Telenor, PMCL million four country 2020 that
2015. Pakistan's has industry, Pakistan of airline in Airlines, civil $25 billion the exceeding International aviation flagship turnover
permitting 2006 policy mortgage to shipping a banks government and new announced in ships. financial institutions The
sector Pakistan serves the within Private Gulf in United which include cities Persian and the Manchester airlines in Kingdom. Pakistan in in main to the destinations addition Airblue,
2005. A government in for billion announced has $1 massive Pakistan Railways years rehabilitation worth the plan over by been five
established new has been from Islamabad trial via Iranian Tehran. to the Zahedan, A of and Kerman Istanbul, rail link cities
for and promote for Asia). tourism, (as Europe Europe part Turkey especially It exports destined to of is trade, expected is
system. banking a has diverse and large Pakistan
In led a the program of to nationalization six banks. 1974, government-owned creation
of local the A lead industry. the program to 1990s foreign-owned the privatization and entry into banks in
car (more As of than models) to multi-national consumer five a construction a 2010, specialized certain aggressive waiting list allowing as in bonanza. middle Pakistan, boom emerging the six were have domestic banks as commercial banks as well 7-month class, for banks.Since consumption for and banks marketing there public-owned begun well four a 2000 Pakistani banks, private of as 25 finance
financial in attract resilient of to world FDI sector. banking the 2008–09, remarkably Pakistan's and during substantial has which remained amount served sector strong feature a a the crisis in
indicate positioning large June tests in the in 2008 with robust, medium markets. data conducted themselves banks banks niche that the are and relatively small-sized Stress
London 2000.An article of development his in Asia fosters registering thus the in 510% Bureau Feridun with Pakistan. Pakistan of since Jalil financial of over in growth by Economy Pacific presents Mete evidence strong growth provisionally Pakistani 2012 economic Rs.807,807 of University published million Greenwich this that Statistics Abdul econometric at colleague Journal valued sector in The
since The particularly Lahore. twenty-threefold sector like expanded property has in metropolises 2001,
in production 20 million to that the to the 6.1 housing address Pakistan Chamber million units next in for shortfall late annually Industry Karachi of 2006 estimated of years. to Pakistan the 0.5 increased meeting of has units in housing overall backlog be in Nevertheless, and Commerce housing
present years than The over estimate more 50 is that the noted aging 50% report that old. is an suggests rapidly also stock and stock of housing
is settlements. urban in and of 50% now population squatter the slums It estimated that also lives
meeting replacement The report that beyond out-lived of resources besides financial the the in said the backlog of housing government. is housing, units,
and formal framework this thus resources housing non-government in in facilitate 2006. growth system.The private financing to This over million at place sector mobilise provisionally registering 149% market-based Rs.459,829 sector a for Statistics since putting the valued necessitates in finance 2012 a Pakistan of Bureau
million valued at 65% of provisionally Statistics this 2000. sector in over Rs.389,545 registering 2005 since thus Bureau growth The Pakistan
in Bureau at The sector 2000. since valued 78% over thus registering this provisionally 2005 million Rs.631,229 of growth Pakistan Statistics
of Statistics provisionally registering this Pakistan Rs.1,358,309 96% thus over in 2000. The growth Bureau since valued million sector 2005 at
largest is services. the wholesale of and trade retail The sub-sector the
sector the percent. is at in overall 31.5 estimated services share Its
transaction traders based by margins traded. of taken wholesale on trade sector the commodities and retail the on is The
grew 2.5 the year. to at this 1.7 percent 2012–13, as sector compared In in previous percent
the matter years, the for largely supply a remained balancing demand of against has Pakistan's unresolved electricity matter. For
for network faces its electricity. in challenge the responsible a of revamping significant supply Pakistan
overseeing through supply. quality a in the it the similar turnaround comprehensive credit for government has failed for claims the recovery, of in the a network improvement just oversee electricity to economy While a
sunlight energy. substantial Most in the suggest investment conditions for cities which Pakistan solar receive would year, good throughout in
panels, they be should to that in If shortfall to forced be rich people solar energy shifted can purchase Pakistan are the solar controlled. the
before 2007. make economy as the will this boost again
According to econometric his versa of and Quality leads consumption to growth electricity colleague Shahbaz, & in not Muhammad in University Feridun of but an analysis vice Pakistan Greenwich economic Quantity published Mete by
..
lines, Foreign to have of investment Bank had to by declined and by order, weak according due since significantly 54.6% dropping overhauled law and along liberal instability especially Pakistan's the been 2010, Pakistan.Business political regulations 1999.
Most removed. direct investment to been the capital have barriers flow and of international
Foreign restrictions in sectors. to and face is equity most allowed capital, up investment 100% participation any the on investors of inflow not do of of
rule. dividends, now capital fees profits, the or remittance is of service Unlimited
business the decade rising insurgency over corruption. domestic insecurity past doing political vehement due and to has However, increasingly and difficult instability, becoming been
report September Doing confirmed year each since of the degrading for its Pakistan Business Index This Ease 2009. Bank's ratings by can World be
been for a to Tariffs 25% with of the maximum rate 16%, reduced industry). car average have an of (except
privately to oil early the started owned, has momentum, 1990s, most with the next and which system big in process, targeted gained privatization The sector the privatization operation. of banking be the
in of the upgrade end business economy recent risk the by Standard been The have and rating Moody's improvements as (country such at Poor's agencies recognised international and 2003). the environment and
2014–2015 Net 2013–14 (July–October) in compared as (July–October). FDI in increase to 47.1%
are a in in taking corporate keen the interest foreign rapid of Pakistan. sector Pakistan's investors the economy, growth With
been in majority acquired many by In corporations groups. recent years, stakes multinational have
Bank million $339 Additional Prime million shares Philip $460 ABN In $243 Commercial $1.8 Bank of China for Union for $382 by million. $487 by Singapore-based million Bank Tobacco PICIC by Arçelik for Dawlance Company for for by Chartered 2016, $228 57.6% for billion Standard Temasek Mobile Morris acquired International Lakson by Holdings Etisalat million acquired PakTel Amro by for PTCL million
Foods stake In 2016, Engro for 51% FrieslandCampina acquired $446.81 million. in
helping In K-Electric foreign 2016, for 66.4% deficit. the $1.77 receipts also sold to current from are The Abraaj in its Electric cover sales account these stake exchange Shanghai billion.The Group
highest the Pakistan the witnessed of export in billion US$25.1 FY 2013–14.
subsequent years have However, in declined considerably. exports
declined set year international from This when started commodity an financial 2014–15 slump in.
by side shortages, compounded rate. supply structural was exchange input including high energy costs and This constraints overvalued an
2016, 2014 year by financial declined From exports percent. 12.4 to
over period this the Exports patterns. world was trend growth trade growth similar to
facing Pakistan's continued during external sector stress 2016–17.
by still trade percent Pakistan's year 2016–17. during But the merchandise fiscal grew 0.1 exports
the grow continued compared the imports 18.0 The as a much percentage during large 2017 and year. to by to grew rate at FY a previous faster of
commodity and registered weak significant and activity. stagnant of prices drop 2015 2011 product weak and because early since between had global economic been World imports but 2014
contributed the was in slowdown to the in countries which Economic growth lacklustre OECD China.
substantially between world real real world and in growth growth the imports GDP declined. Furthermore, ratio
in the pace worldwide activity triggered import protectionist of in economic import a to liberalization, trade consumption from measures. gave slowdown currency substitution, and shift non-traded content a in the This towards of decline traded goods,
exports the Pakistan's are and bulk region A to directed OECD China. of
strong correlation to Pakistani between exports OECD in China. data suggest and imports Historical
destinations FY data, these of to China. shipped two and i.e. than half per exports are more As OECD 2016 country's
China of exports, activity increased economic (CPEC), decline backdrop.Pakistan's in particularly rising thus the as part a Economic A Pakistan are in in to due showing faster overall sector. relatively Pakistan occurred Energy the this at rate imports trend Corridor
CPEC construction that has imported. under to be heavy The projects require machinery
being well is levels imports. also currently It led consumption, is by investments observed in of relatively that as higher economy as the resulting both
over and showing US$24.8 up year FY picked Pakistan's a 2017. During growth 12.6 exports previous to 2018 FY percent of reached billion
figure touched percent Imports the other 16.2 by US$56.6 highest on increased also the billion. and hand of
to the billion since As years. deficit widened ten was US$31.8 trade a last result, highest which the
below:- the the in five below: table imports the commodities table for listed are are Pakistan years the listed in last Pakistan major last years fiscal for exports major commodities fiscal five
fuel significantly pressure of put the capital and increase the external imports equipment account. on 2017, in During FY
the a 2017. accompanied 39.4 trade merchandised percent global falling to by imports, in increase reversal POL grew oil deficit billion FY in US$26.885 result prices by A led in as exports, to
ensure helped Current exchange deficit reserves of declined to rate. foreign offset income high to profit to was and impact gas remittances same severe, oil an current FY as slightly these not Fund – exchange improvement to in the however, in billion lower FY mainly offset inflows inflows increased was against the account partially by account the deficit the and by 2016.However, Support available While over were the financial inflows year, period country stability 2017, The account, firms.Current due the both in billion impact US$3.2 last in US$12.4 on the Coalition repatriations gap;
by US$1.6 outflow million, and in an of whereas million nine-months FDI year. net percent the grew reached billion an US$393 inflow of last against US$631 saw 12.4 FPI Net period,
of period for Encouragingly country, acquisition and the merger companies. the deals saw multiple foreign completion local the between and
foreign enter to conglomerates. the and market, joint also intention automakers announced their local into entered ventures with multiple Pakistani Moreover, some
for foreign Pakistan on that investors' radar, provides and is indicates a going forward. outlook inflows positive FDI clearly This
of low 5.5 international at capital extremely a an US$1.0 of Sukuk billion market, successful percent. government's issuance in rate the
continued billion Besides, China, inflows institutions during support like of (IFIs) official from US$1.1 from international the bilateral and and the like to Asian in post-EFF Bank, Development enjoy net period. financial recorded period: partners the were Pakistan loan World Bank
4 by month payments. of a result, the finance country's four to around US$20.8 to import reserve amounted As sufficient 2017 May FX billion
sources aid grants. and from economic receives several loans Pakistan as
(WB), Pakistan. provide Monetary (IMF), Bank Fund Asian (ADB), World The Development Bank to etc. International loans long-term
also countries. developed Pakistan bilateral aid receives oil-rich from and
aid the Foreign Pakistani money has Economy. of of been for main the one sources
billion 2006–9. almost of during leading priorities Asian aid the $6 Prime Collection a provide of Pakistan close to Government Minister one been assistance the Bank development basis on to Foreign delegations regular has himself with Development of every aid.The to will Pakistani collect Foreign
aid four-year, a largely strategy in programme country's billion Pakistan a showing aimed Bank unveiled for funding beefing increase 2006–2009, $6.5 lending under new infrastructure. the at significant a up up of World The to
economic annual provide Japan million $500 will to Pakistan. aid
to 2008, International the a approved to and economy. November In loan country's Pakistan, the Monetary 7.6 (IMF) of rebuild billion stabilise help has Fund
5.2 and 2010 years, fiscal extended Pakistan the loans the totalling billion Between IMF 2008 dollars. to
the ties with in off government decided cut to 2011 IMF. The
in newly to a on-going government debt $6.6 a it negotiated ties, issues. and which re-established billion three-year the deal these would allow with package However elected 2013
Pakistan In US$6 2019, finalised IMF. foreign billion aid May with a
is concessionary Pakistan's contribution Initiative. from Corridor Road China–Pakistan of a under being developed Economic China with the bailout is such the loans 22nd and from mainly This Belt IMF.The
and vaguely decades investments industrial over BRI, future Much any CPEC transcends like currency as economic and is estimated past influence. global it only spans and of fiat of value development
exchange and The role economy living abroad has foreign Pakistanis in reserves. important played Pakistan's of remittances
and settled Western Pakistanis important to in Europe of Pakistan. North are America sources The remittances
in workers the Arab been the states of of rich billions Pakistani Since sources remittances. of dollars 1973 have oil
in to the contributed FY2017. billion The diaspora, economy 9 US$19.3 Pakistani million-strong
Switzerland, (including Australia, major of EU GCC Arabia, Canada, US, Bahrain, countries countries Japan, to Qatar and source Pakistan include Norway, Saudi countries. Oman), and UAE, UK The Kuwait, remittances
the seen all-time US previous Remittances growth reached high a have in remittances billion to compare of of home fiscal year year 3.0% 2017 Pakistani sent dollars. negative 19.9 when by at workers overseas
remittances and after countries oil in gulf Arabian 2016. to This adverse prices decline economic due in is the fall in the of mainly conditions
Expo, World its However, countries Saudi new implementation Qatar to the in these in of FIFA be opening . Kuwait recent all the Cup, the development should Dubai in of for the activities visit avenues Arabia's P.M employment Vision helpful 2030 particularly recent and
coming forward Going in expect one the improvements years. can
overseas Remittances in home under: are fiscal by as year the Pakistanis sent 2016/17
billion Budget Fiscal estimated: June 5,013.8 year: Bank estimated: summary collection 390.1 billion budget billion Fiscal 30 outlay: 5,103.8 July 1 4,713.7 billion rupees Expenditures estimated: rupees rupees rupees (FY2017/18) Rs Revenues borrowing –
2016–2017 rupees were (FY to Government July 4,383.6 billion March). expenditures
projects downward a development assistance. Total expenditures compromising without witnessed and the expenditures social on trajectory
Particularly, adequately meet raised Program investment expenditures Development have order requirements. Public been in to Sector (PSDP) the under
800 348.3 federal billion over 2017 to Rs percent. a During size of during 129 from 2013, billion FY FY increase the showing cumulative Rs PSDP increased of has
expenditures and current the 2016 activity tax country the GDP of the percent of various in higher period nine 3.9 months at related against fiscal same During percent to account stood of expenditures. development GDP year, FY recorded incentives security of on economic in 3.5 investment first fiscal along promote with deficit of and
was registered fiscal 33,509 of estimates 3.7 of months comparable of billion, at nine of in at 3.4 year percent the current the FY 2016. recorded fiscal the during Rs first deficit percent period GDP against On previous basis
Rs 2016. comparable 6.2 Total Rs period revenues FY in 3,145.5 the against at grew billion to during of percent FY 2017 July–March, 2,961.9
government the out progressive the provincial been the in at Since the liberalization the USSR both level. and carried has before national of economic by collapse 1991,
fiscal of year the surpassing target $4 of achieved $8.4 the almost in billion. financial billion has 2006–07, government Pakistan FDI of
Pakistan's declined and Despite by to Foreign Pakistan. significantly investment the due financial military this to 2010, according law dropping the ~54.6% had in achievement, milestone operations, Bank by of Karachi, order crises, situation
the ~$25 estimate, expenditures the Government were 2006 billion. From
the been science primary has a and Funding education Government Pakistan, 1947. of policy since in of
Moreover, largest command world the is English Speaking having population) 2nd makes the it the 18 over with million the fast Pakistan, language, (11% 3rd which in and Largest in English spreading in Nation a Asia. English of Pakistanis the
per about 445,000 graduates that, On year. graduates science computer and of produces 10,000 university Pakistan top
Pakistan million Nigeria. population the school of out the of and still has these after rates illiteracy second statistics, the largest children) in Despite (5.1 highest world one
60.1% Fund. world, annually external various 2009, 2010, (owning ranks ~$55.98 public Monetary debt the has of to western Pakistan and trying been Factbook, on Pakistan in debt largely with the authorities Pakistan a with currently $3 total to international of 63rd billion nations per in CIA GDP.Since debt negotiate to billion As monetary to the cancellation respect the 2010), World spends servicing International in
federal Pakistan administrative Pakistan Economics technology Kashmir of Science in Pakistanis and Development RawalpindiOther of Pakistan Pakistan of Finance of Human in Authority province Economy unit: Economic of Pakistani Trade Economy (Pakistan) Foreign Pakistan Pakistan (Pakistan) Pakistan Khyber Baltistan worth of of Gilgit Bonds net Lahore OIC of effects the forecasting of By List by history of Economy Pakistan Azad Pakhtunkhwa Pakistan trade Karachi 2010 Prize Economy product Economy Districts domestic Economy Punjab, Economy of provinces in by of Pakistan Ministry List liberalisation Consensus of Economy Investment of gross Commerce Pakistani Board Trading of of Balochistan, Economy Economic of of Corporation Pakistan Sindh Index Islamabad by Economic floods Ministry tariffs and 2019–20 Agriculture Pakistan of Development in List of List Economy of Economy of Economic of Industry budget Pakistan of Pakistan Faisalabad of Economy
of Pakistan Division, of Trade Bank of Ministry Pakistan World Government of "Pakistan". Government Finance, Commerce, Statistics Statistics Ministry of Pakistan Government Pakistan Summary
World The Factbook.
Intelligence Central Agency.
market online provided Market Tariffs an by applied tariffs of Map, customs requirements as Access database by and Pakistan ITC's
a economy The developing income economy. lower-middle the of is Philippines
the Monetary 2020 by the and economy in it economy largest GDP the Fund, nominal the of is 31st world's largest by estimate International 13th Asia. As
of Thailand Singapore, highest Brunei, The Malaysia, by the regional GDP one is in countries Asia values, of Indonesia. per sixth the capita is and after emerging and Philippines the markets Southeast
economy which based to transition an more newly country, services The a is on manufacturing. primarily one agriculture on industrialized based one considered has and Philippines from in
and be purchasing transport oil, products, to As petroleum of exports was 2020, equipment, at fruits. and garments, $934 products, by billion.Primary copper parity electronic GDP coconut include power products, semiconductors estimated
include Japan, States, the South trading Germany, Thailand. Taiwan Korea, China, Singapore, Kong, United the and partners Major Netherlands, Hong
Tiger The as one the Philippines and Malaysia, Indonesia, with of together Thailand. Vietnam, Economies been has named Cub
currently growing economies. of It Asia's one fastest is
different ensure classes, mainly and the infrastructure to do reducing disparities to and corruption, However, with remain, regions in country's investing growth. between having income growth wide the necessary problems alleviating socioeconomic and the major future
the projected world in the 2050. Philippine in 5th and The is by biggest to Asia economy 16th be largest
PricewaterhouseCoopers, richest economy it world 2060. in to the that According estimates be will it 12th to the the 14th by
HSBC year 2050, opposes of that While the to maybe GDP stated reports yearly the have due from Philippines PLC, its been China). by (Second, will rate higher growth in other 2050 6.5% this after Holdings
are year, performance the of the However, still every by statistics the consistently may economic on vary depending government plagued corruption. which
The Philippine Islands had been the traced back to times. economic the history pre-colonial of
The then country thalassocracies which for merchants islands trade. kingdoms oversaw different and composed the was of of to number the coming large
Chinese mostly were and which Arab, located were merchants by riverbanks, plains. coastal by kingdoms, and welcomed ports Japanese Indian, these central
products. gold, rice, goods as pots merchants The and traded other for such
system reflected was goods The which implemented with lifestyle. pre-colonial and and the their filled that life barter at time a imported people fashion enjoyed
set trade Japanese storage traders. was and perishables, the the of with pots, used northern From century, 12th clay for of centred huge and and up in industry a manufacture tea the Okinawan other around the burnay Philippines
Japanese, rice the These 'Ruson-tsukuri' best used leaves were known purpose among were tea the for and considered storage vessels wine and fresh. (Luzon-made) in of keeping as pots
became Asia. Hence, after Ruson-Tsukuri Northeast pots in sought
kiln single Philippine branding on the own Each by bottom Ruson-tsukuri a had of marked letter. symbol, its the baybayin
rice, has wine carabaos, of especifically fowls, as numbers Luzon abundance and The boar great as were islands agriculturists also deer, of well and people wild great the goats. great
wax, of honey by and addition, and date the produced were palms there quantities colored cotton natives. clothes, great In also
in deer-skins Japan state Pangasinan and Okinawa. of precolonial The often Caboloan exported to
with tortoise Ma-i produced yuta Nation of and betel medicinal true Asia. nuts beeswax, cotton, The shell, in cloth East their pearls, trade
century, abundant By the two monopoly were Visayas the Madja-as, trade of Rajahnate home and shared of hand a the largest honey. to of of the wax islands Kedatuan the Philippine Pasig the early on rest Maynila archipelago.The in goods established is Cebu polities the which swine, the Kedatuan delta, other throughout the Tondo, sixteenth fowls, of the cotton, Dapitan on and fish, rice, of and River Chinese
on Pedro harvests produce said rice and to the feed rice to Chirino people. and crops was that commented year, sufficient great clothe Leyte the were two and a cotton
specialized jewelry. and the Rajahnate Mindanao, the gold In in of the of Butuan mining of manufacture
Sultanate of of for known and Maguindanao harvesting the cinnamon. raising The was
pearl-diving and Sultanate of operations. lake of a Lanao had Sultanate the by The had industry fishing lively Sulu Lanao
The in highways. kingdoms ancient active of natural were the international used and they as trade, ocean Philippines
Ancient with and as north Japan. engaged far in as trading long-range far were as west peoples as Maldives their neighbors as as Asian
even the betel of had tradition that Micronesia chewing Austronesian historians it and first arrived proposed was Oceania (fermented contacts rice that the also area coconut had they people with there. regular in other the only in when Some Europeans Western tuba sap), crops, because nut
Philippines. tattoos of resemblance and complex and Borneo among also between interesting body Visayans uncanny those Borneo the connection some The ancient of proved
(Cebu) mentioned trade. of the Sugbu that areas of Antonio for to rajah tribute the surrounding to merchants purpose chronicler, and pay came from Magellan's ambassadors all Pigafetta,
the rajah. paying were with tribute crew a While Siam Magellan's the representative to rajah, was from
de also Luzon López come Mindoro came purpose. same Legazpi how and to regularly also he merchants merchants the had how Luzon from trade, the Cebu for to and for mentioned Chinese wrote Miguel
21 Islands with encounters AD. Greek The Visayan earlier in had traders
people cultures. contacts other extensive Its with enjoyed trade
fishing. also Thais, Arabs, Indians, and natives in trade Cambodians, as aquaculture Malays or the involved relations, Indonesians Japanese, from and were immigrants.Aside Vietnamese, traders
of net type utilizes of lever two criss-crossed poles. which water of is a into use made make the The salambao, the of large is lowered that which fishing a type natives a raft via
Night Mexico. the with copal candles accomplished of to of of resin made fishing similar help from type was a the particular
of and pens the Spaniards for incubation this fry small observed, predators astonished was time. also from of that and safe protection method Use at the
to catches. young fishing, were used the During nets also protect the future and ensure large natives good mesh by
ventures overseas Malacca Southeast communities 1500s From as in the Timor as were Luções, military Portuguese in and traders Malacca and mercenaries. set people and up participated Eastern Philippines; as from early Asia 1560s, campaigns to where and in as late Burma, they trading they across to many Luzon, the referred
(Jawi: Malacca. spice and Regimo a was General) Raja, Chief Temenggung de تمڠݢوڠ) and Luções magnate prominent who (Governor a was Portuguese in One
Strait principalities the Sea, medieval between commerce He the maritime of of the an head Philippines. Ocean, Malacca, Indian traded also of the and armada protected which the South China was and the
which other Lapu-Lapu forced them by among other The slavered like islands taxes. to pay were tribes natives
of slavering the system. The removed arrival this Spanish
de Mexico Lopez Legazpi with and from islands. unified Miguel the Tlaxcaltecs conquered
coast possible to discovery by Urdaneta. Agustino trip back was conquered to the The of thanks Mexico the
done The General Filipinas Capital Mexico administration on the and was formed through New Capitania Spain which Viceroyalty. Islas depended of the
further when trade government system. Islas inaugurated Filipinas the of the The grew Spanish Galleon Manila economy
once made per reinforcements military from across port voyages Acapulco ships, Philippines. in year Manila to Trading Ocean the the twice Mexico the in settlers and Pacific of or
New Province of Spain. were part the then cities Both of
growth improving Manila of years. the This of of made in trade major city the the the world, the in economy global one succeeding Philippine the cities
also chili Peru. potatoes, and Trade introduced such pineapples foodstuffs Mexico and from maize, tomatoes, peppers, chocolate as
first cash important to Filipinos. domesticated then the became an Philippines, crop for introduced Tobacco, Latin-America, in and
Asia, mined the which The Americas, of demand during also center high became silver in the the in was distribution in Philippines period.
independence. Galleon for exported Chinese Indian until gathered Manila Indonesian exchange In its silver, when to 1815, be Manila to silks gems Mexico and operated system this spices, got Mexico.The
economy Nevertheless, didn't the of affect the islands. it
a confirmed Philippine King the charter. with III Spain Royal March establishment On of Charles 10, the of Company 1785, 25-year
importation the Cape the of shipping goods of Chinese company Basque-based of Spain was goods to well and into the via on Good The directly the as granted Philippines, Indian monopoly a the as Hope.
islands to and form dissolved Philippines Indies. was After the the Pacific other Spain lost Mexico territory, East a Spain as Spanish New making
King the of Philippines while directly Manila part being the This and Real the Northern governed and of the of Guam, and by Spain governance. territorial Islands, by resulted governed Captaincy the Audiencia was Philippine of Pacific the of was Mariana Philippines Micronesia Palau General the islands in
as grow the of opportunities. rise Philippines further the It saw the of economy made people
coffee the remained Agriculture as economy, in large largest well tobacco. of as being of contributor to the Asia producer produce largest a
Industrial as known In period Age. the the Revolution Victorian during Europe, Britain from spread the Great
was created distributed. the The investment it this bringing wealth, and unevenly of although for great colonies, raw industrialization demands materials Europe with from very
Basco trade. this had Philippines the Governor-General opened to
trade nineteenth a a century for was Previously, of but materials the international seen goods. both the post a for source market was as Philippines manufactured and trading developed in as it as raw
industrializing rising the of of local an to rose satisfy and the industries rapidly developed Europe. economy its demands Philippines The
time the between immigrants European half. and by Canal, which came of the cut of Europe flow the small with the opening Philippines Suez A travel
the quickly with ideals the the found government of and their friars notably which way dangerous, other society, liberalism. and the including authorities ideas American, French Freemasons, found who New Philippines, revolutions, through the and along others, Spanish colonial into about spread
1834 was formally In Company recognized. of the free trade abolished, the was Royal Philippines and
an its harbor, With North and Manila open port became Asian, for European, excellent traders. American
world. Chinese the stores from merchants opened selling European parts all of alongside goods immigrants the
bank II of the Isabel Español de Philippines the Philippine 1851. in El The Bank was in Islands) first Filipino opened the the Banco (now
In 1873 crops—tobacco, three by additional nineteenth Philippine opened ports exports. abaca, and to foreign and sugar—dominated the century late commerce, were
were the economy Americans under mixed. results of The the
the in phase the 1910s with the due recovery and investment US, agriculture. during An the growth from to wars Spain initial high occurred and
Philippines its The briefly neighbors. outpace would at first
fell This would the years. in later growth behind not as last
US restraints quotas growth became be development in protectionist as 1910–1920. forestalled the restricted 1920s agricultural place markets beyond can and in in of crash further attributed modernization the to any took agriculture.The undertaken Stagnation results access period late fiscal to by and program a in
rice. order done address to in in the of the in shortfall growing supply This was turn
and rice the Spanish a reallocation Philippines would 1930s importer Americans relative of mark the of wars of by became end prosperity. to export period as of the with the an The exporter once later result to and net crops.The labour a this the
year. Philippines capped the at to of 921,000 The sugar 1934 tons exports per US Sugar Act
customs public on as Payne–Aldridge Expenditure was for the agriculture revenue. of the stripped reduced government infrastructure Act
against competing the now Manila Nylon. was invented newly hemp
reduced of 1% rate still per the Although to land the agriculture increasing, was was annum. for area cultivated
this peg reaching of between was the consequences The far the policy the with and peso most dollar. period
was enforced until law 1975. This by
capital entities investment monetary of It invested by enterprises lead to manufacturing commercial to by owned 40% stability be in 1938. for all provided foreign and which inflows, foreign
Asia. would this hand, other overvaluation peso impact trade foreign rest the with of negative the have the of On a with
independence policy to trade necessitated loosening the have would US. Economic with leading links
would achieve to the competitive broken. to rate, order have an dollar In peso exchange internationally be link
the import towards to true exchange to substitution up move remained as such an currency much opportunity rate exports opened significant The exports. led for floating a uncompetitive until strategy reorienting belated devaluation
Due unofficial occurred. Second the establishing Republic, food receded economic invasion the to Philippine growth Japanese the shortages and
food, President, even rice, the agency Laurel, the by organized rice shortages though an soldiers. was Prioritizing appointed of confiscated the Japanese most distribute Jose of to
one places that due country November from suffered many Manila mainly 1943. typhoon shortages, a that in in country the the the was of severe struck to
were which plots cultivate produced root like private kangkong. to crops forced people The
quick-maturing horai raise in which used a Japanese, brought in order country, the to was in rice, rice Taiwan. The production first
was this. prevented make rains during to self-sufficient but 1943, rice expected in by Horai rice the Philippines 1942
the World known during peso. the fiat Philippines, government II is issued Japanese several in currency denominations; as Japanese War fiat Also Philippine this in government-issued occupying the
5, and centavos and and 50 1942 10 in issue of consisted 10 1, Pesos. denominations first 1, of The 5,
year note 100 and 500 in an Peso 1, 10 while a the ushered brought The Pesos 5 and of next Pesos "replacement notes" 1944 soon after inflationary note.
a Pesos the 1945, 1,000 In Japanese issued note.
the to of low the before which was inflation. Philippines Mouse became as printed in even known by very money, its due money caused This war, new set value severe Mickey
suitcases coconut market or newspapers bills. woven or "bayong" of bags going made of with leaf laden with the to overflowing portrayed Japanese-issued Anti-Japanese (native stories buri the strips)
Mickey of pesos. 1944, Mouse In 100 cost than more matches box a
cost around of Mickey camote 1945, pesos. kilogram In Mouse 1000 a
country Japanese devaluation money, a evidenced 1944. plagued in by with the Inflation experienced the inflation of January 60% the
1945, city, crisis country was devastated food re-establishment the Commonwealth the of left crisis. the After with financial and a in
got its 1946, Philippines the A Philippine in creating year independence Third in Republic. America, later the
socio-economic to period, of a wide-sweeping and the problems elected President effort proposed program. reorganized In Roxas Manuel massive government, solve the an newly legislative the
The GI No. Third of Philippines increase which Bank to Development Central the Order and organization the Finance to No. established Roxas system of Bank Philippine Affairs and Rights of by establishment for the 18; laws the Republic's the the initial taxation for were: creation (which revision of the veterans; Philippines); a of sovereignty reorganized undertakings by Department government through service would proposing foreign Foreign the the in of be the banking Republic was revenues.President year the as of Corporation 1958 Among Filipino moved administer Act Rehabilitation to the strengthen Executive the Bill 265. of
a attend government" In to campaigned parity that amendment to 1935 President a needed for "cash-starved leading the Constitution. battered nation, Roxas the
right the by or Philippine the citizens the American resources utilize and Trade Act give Trade for States. Act, in from Relations return Bell United industries support country's demanded natural the would amendment, the rehabilitation to This
plebiscite. to this nation President, approval the The the proposed Congress, move a of through with
the pioneered foreign Roxas The Republic. the policy of administration also
Quirino Vice of Elpidio Foreign appointed Secretary Affairs. was President
Nations, P. Philippines United Romulo, newly diplomacy for of in helped the established the stage international shape Carlos relations. to permanent General international representative country's identity and as the the
Assembly, Nations the World General with Organization gained Labor membership (WHO), and United (ILO), foreign Health Scientific administration, the the United Roxas etc. Philippines Nations Cultural to entities, international established countries the ties International the During Organization Educational, (UNESCO), such the Organization as diplomatic and
economy." major their elections, dominant economic Garcia point P. regain participation the administration focal to promoted When his a policy, whose in Carlos by effort and "obtain President national independence; won Filipinos was "Filipino to First" the
patronizing and and in support industries. and The for for controls the implemented Filipino Filipino services, currency citizens' favorable products administration campaigned import
State NatIon which to Program," mobilize connection as of the goal the with the Address In was self-sufficiency productive more his and investment, "more thrift, aimed in savings. President first work, national Garcia more efficiency" "Austerity of government's described more that
aimed Act, Act promote and through Practices to honesty and No. public Corrupt 301, and prevent Graft corruption, The Anti Republic trust.
which was 99 attained Garcia address the 25 shortened December military of Another the of 1961, of responsibilities the Agreement years.President Macapagal US country 1959, the in lease to from Macapagal, his the administration the Bohlen–Serrano previous be during the of administration. era" in goals "new achievement term on and emphasized inaugural was 30, bases that the the Diosdado to
public would corruption, honesty presidency. and in the resolve his that He reiterated prevail to eradicate assured his
Macapagal, poverty sector, through partnership government private every to self-sufficiency and aimed alleviate for the welfare, too, promotion providing solutions and the and President of the by citizen's of unemployment. at
which the the Act (an Development Bank tramways. Act the Act Philippines); national Veterans the established industries; established Code railroad and 3470, of Republic Agricultural Industries No. passed the operate Philippine Administration; Republic Act established were: which which act National 3518, No. laws Emergency that the National and promote Republic to (PNR) established Among Railways local of establishment the Act Reform cottage Republic Land No. Republic or administration organize, Philippine Authority Employment No. the Cottage and during the No. to Bank; the 4156, revive, 3844 3466, which Land Macapagal the (NACIDA) established
of promote and as economic exchange in part national to attempt growth. lifted The decontrol controls program administration foreign stability the an
the groups movements respective law communist and Ferdinand Marcos for number of rising their lobbying student President and sectors. midst reforms E. increasing martial an in declared in socialist
by Malacañang the government, restiveness the be where frustrations Storm, this Palace to to turned Leftists culminating to activists the rallies First their in express Philippine stormed only Constabulary. held Quarter back
gunfire. after event This in left many injured heavy particular of four people dead and exchanges
military law rule effectively rights and suspended declaration country. the the of Philippines, the that and in 21, martial a disorder 1972, in unrest, Marcos further middle the 1081, on in No. issued was civil September installing Proclamation imposed There
GDP to P193 8 in about from years. rose the law, million Philippines of martial million P55 the rising during The
spurred about banks, massive by debt. growth commercial was 62% for accounting from percent external of lending This
martial the developing of Philippines borrowers. As the a was law heaviest during one the country,
were chances legitimizing the a the market. enhancing aggressive of seen global by means These of by purportedly the moves country martial in critics as law
infrastructure money improve was Much promote the on of and pump-priming tourism. spent to
the lagged per aggressive policies, capita. Asia behind growth spending its GDP in However, counterparts rate despite Southeast borrowing Philippines the and
average Indonesia percent. of like counterparts 1970–1980, a Malaysia, The registered Singapore, an mean in 5.73 its percent while growth, 7.97 and growth garnered country, only Thailand,
be apparent which was imprudent and the upon debt rampant policy rates, by at lag, attributed Regime, underpinned end corruption of and mismanaged to all very management, can Marcos cronyism. became economic failures This management exchange the of that State-run the monetary monopolies, by brought
few by in of other the of governmental has mismanagement to and the (BNPP) trend power time our “[…]main years As Bataan from use Power Morong, the in more Plant concentration economic private distinguishing Bataan. than small the the characteristics of hands the are located the in towards glaring of periods government, of some economic sector.”There factions examples been and Nuclear palpable Dios history de said Emannuel dispense functions the the the privileges of to Marcos
the the by competitiveness to was electricity creation in the to industrialization providing Started affordable supposed and boost the in country's BNPP 1970s, fuel country. job
mothballing—without eventually engineering nuclear to led watt the this, billion structural a and single from suffered Far of plant issues over-runs which its from cost generating and US$2.3 electricity.
the of the to martial 1970. law, in percent income Income able the era were 60 1980, percent during only grew contribute 22.5 percent at inequality poorest nation down the of 25.0 as of from
the 10 percent 41.7 at larger percent, 37.1 meanwhile, income at up 1980, at percent took richest The share a from 1970. of
favoring faced accusations the as of family. coincided questions administration certain with in the trends that cronyism of administration, Marcos These close the ruling to companies were
Expenditure the 1965 (Family conducted percent Income in to the 1985, poverty from rose 58.9 FIES to Philippines According 1985. and Survey) incidence from in in percent 1965 41 to
wages be unskilled lesser laborers. can This agricultural lower and skilled attributed to real wages and for real
25 wages Real fell from level. skilled one-third of laborers real about their percent decreased wages for 1962 agricultural while about and by their level, 1962 unskilled
was incomes helped It and blow of cushion higher force problems. rich of participation the the mentioned that labor higher observed the
commodity result overall lack the The unrest propaganda from failed social coups. the during through numerous economy of socio-political global had opposition's took over and cynicism, the People an government financial a gone attempts was against transparency, various where assassination cronies, there and Power caused revolution, consumer shortages, massive administration that collapse protests, Aquino disasters of speculations, and by an economic resulting
development the Era's incurred Marcos as country, since country's crippling which recession began in the point "Latin-American to debt Philippines started from it debt-driven slowly the the made the Asia" time, East that in era. the worst experience the At post-war
the ready that debts, the paying governments all image immediate Most as in Aquino reforming efforts write-off, off and the including to were of possible. some directed those the of was country administration of
plight lower the by was and resulted the in of This cuts the further now jobs to budget gone. offered class aggravated because government them the
provinces Infrastructure including repairs, roads asphalt. concrete halted secluded into in projects, were turning
and massive corporations, Aquino the was many the of administration which Privatization government priority lay-offs catering most of utilities, to inflation. led
in by arose administration Aquino belief problems from the of the of removal administration persistent The its that that the power. the was can previous decentralization solved be
next administration. years the the Growth began in gradually of few
erratic short-lived, to bit. 1987 a the Somehow, a recovery 1991 political situation and from patchy, was as there stabilized still
With was were in this, of strengthened. trade became terms movements regained, gradually and growth peso positive more of confidence the regional gradually realized, investors competitive,
in in of momentum administration as the important the an and openness country". basically "hastening reform its The pace role liberalization vehicle served carrier of the and the Ramos of as
country trade, made more The proponent a the open relations. and which capital was foreign liberalization, administration investments, to account of
World It ng the established, Organization Bangko was the when such as Sentral trade Trade during the and administration term Philippines APEC. was of associations free the Pilipinas the and joined other the
and was the reduction Also, of came Bonds Brady fruition considered debt government certain as 1992. issuance also called such, to in bonds
in negotiations with the during adviser became Almonte of more forces administration. the key Mindanao actually successful of one Jose administration, with as conflicting Key the
was Philippine burdened a time succeeded Ramos heavy 1992, already budget in the deficit. Corazon economy with Aquino By the
austerity by as disasters such result Mt. International This the Fund was imposed Pinatubo. eruption natural with destruction and the the standard largely the Monetary of a measures of arrangement caused credit by
government deficit. out spending through to to immediately pump was ruled priming according Hence, due the Canlas,
to institutional which included deregulation. therefore resorted and privatization structural reforms, through policy changes of Ramos
as economic which Development measures sanctioned (4). and the formation policy part on Legislative on of branches, the consensus of He (LEDAC), Legislative-Executive on a for reform forum building, Advisory the the the Executive served important Council bills
economy the guaranteed also were addressed the of plagued that The placed brownouts that enactment through policies rates. daily
each with shortage, economy from during frequent suffered 8 of year from Ramos first The power lasting severe brownouts, the administration 12 to hours.
together Power resolve this with law problem, was Law. Crisis To Act into made the Electric the Build-Operate-Transfer
because was for Twenty for sustained shown in were December growth all rates administration time.The and and eliminate growth able in shortage economic of be plants long-run problems 1993 to to as power 1994 built set and the by the economy seemed sustainable some from to effect, these, 1997. promising power growth,
Thailand However, contagion the and Korea started from affecting Philippines. Crisis Asian which the started
prompted negative busts ventures, Philippine property into to very resulting and plunge risky the continuous a growth economy and rate. devaluation This in
feat countries. The it administration, to the Crisis anybody the else was in contagion was that however, withstand Asian of the better than effect the able of remarkable neighboring
such AFTA, was WTO. and the reform.Perhaps GATT, made policies redistribution, of institutional included foundations important which Account APEC, Most some associations commitments liberalization, the and as development, for subsequent most the Capital important free tenets reform, and stronger economic are important of trade and political clear that in the the the Liberalization administration to of it breakthroughs administration
in The capital of culminated full-peso opening opening liberalization 1992. in the convertibility and
were breakthrough bank the of which Bangko debts old then the ng involved of taken the that the Pilipinas, Sentral another off establishment again, reduction of in is also debts And its the central books.
of cabinets." Estrada's to shocks also continued endure administration and Crisis Asian by administration's economic mismanagement characterized contagion, the had was Although the the administration the "midnight
those the inequitable the and not rhetoric, contraceptives, of drama caused and administration other administration occurred. it. basic of administration Despite for Reform, policy, unwanted poverty The to The stopped economy and image which also match Support sudden Reform the of The change revenues All can administration of budget to reduce As of Reform a had of married contributions disasters to the the implementation Development". the to caused still condemned worse family for had to and entrance which contraception. succeeding establishes families. overall indeed, the appropriations was had instead assisting the and Revolutions. their and buddies' Estrada eventually goals, to EDSA efficiently Targeted some "Sustainable fact Jueteng of acknowledgement promises appalling the happening, of influencing of and Agrarian slow, enough, an church fiscal a big of spurred the adjustments "midnight profound able policies cabinet'". gave rise Alleviation towards Agrarian involved In were the reached, the the reprise poor controversies, to all country's over deterioration fertility pushed also to further control administration assistance by Plan, worse. these population Agrarian involved were Rural and were regard, presents social became really by issues composed the 'drinking were that by Agrarian cabinets And for to numerous adjustments the applaud. that that "daytime delivery Poverty pro-poor program also stability not not and of the administration made address its implemented. needs, the meaningful mistakes also which their decisions the policies was resources. limited Communities-Technical need perhaps fertility unmet The the planning very also Cronyism if and the controversy, piece services, administration conceptualized couples that due achieve economic effort implement
contributions the administration As or however, no had notable regional for development, breakthroughs.
to the with standpoint, administration, rates Outsourcing of the the was Process Filipino growth in of an the emergence US, simultaneous Business Overseas good perhaps The period workers a Arroyo (BPO). and economical (OFW) due
of contributions OFW The the remittances improved and of and emergence to the growth. the OFW BPO investments
avoidance grew tax rampant scale In and perhaps deficits 2004, due wide however, as collections fell, grew incidences. to and tax fiscal and evasion tax
come to Fearing the VAT large perhaps the prophecy of and the administration in E-VAT doomsday featuring and fiscal the of increase a fruition, fiscal might same deficits. to that tax 2002 sort pushed the [Argentina due enactment the 12% default] the for revenue crisis, address to
confidence policy on boosted economy and the track fiscal again. brought This back once
intensifying. anew afterwards, Sayyaf political afflicted country terrors Soon the Abu and with the instability economy
Crisis became threat Legitimacy administration. and to a authority also of issue hot The the administration's Arroyo the
of some and through controversial as such charges NBN-ZTE many Deal. Moreover, Arroyo went raps deals the because the administration Broadband
the to of threats local the restored of and Representatives, however was were House of majority leaders quelled subdued. stability administration Due to political support the and the and
inflation the 2008 oil and came the actually were world plague States rates the that high in administration, led started recession rice fiscal crisis, end the major which another experiencing. to and of Towards this with the country rest the the and along for actually anew, United to of
Arroyo important regional development, investments foreign the tourism, and importance into of of highlighted policies the The administration country. the
and studies regional also communities address administration the worsening income address regional to order for in the policy on of of the from issues enactment to disparities the growth. and E-VAT such rural development the per apart as regional pushed fiscal establishment deficits, certain commercial effects Therefore, in capita
administration need actually especially investments in to tourism, other improve The regions touches advocated for that as unexplored development also well.
certain the changing administration launched would tourism, further Holiday touching in improve holidays. To on which policy Economics, involves which the celebrate the we of days
Economics really investments the tourism through approach, improved. Indeed, Holiday and
other frequently As its Arroyo visit for would the administration the to for encourage development. Philippine investment, economy countries the foreign and betterment investment of
the has administration. Philippines Newly gain one consistently latter as The Countries the the Arroyo Presidency under the to years fair Industrialized of had a current coined during
government debts total of in 58% The 47% foreign borrowings. 2008 managed to from government falling
by GDP growth fastest and as 2010 a to overseas placed the 3.6% growing in to the the infrastructure. exports, outsourcing in of slipped Philippines World 2012 government the after 7.3% spending Report, Wealth the markedly on 2011 remittances.The According process in with as world economy country emphasis well was driven less on less the growing business
a as materials sector floods from the addition, raw result in the year. Japan flow same and the affected in for of tsunami imports In Thailand manufacturing the in disruption the of
to program—the crisis to (FTP)—for Philippines enjoys more continuous Transactions Philippines, countries."The help $125 economy Monetary foreign Europe. pool at Tuesday million Sentral economies about 2012. money of reported the to growth disbursed was address as real has Financial contributed million available Fund which the the This reserves, $251.5 which financial crisis-stricken than the made the 5% by Bangko "The ng Pilipinas, least exchange GDP according growing end-2011 to the International Plan saw IMF the since that of in to assistance finance confronting of
a ended 2012 with The in Philippine from points 4,371.96-finish Exchange 5,812.73 index growth 2011. Stock the 32.95%
39th and 2014 been world. the International the The economy as largest economy decades has over the in in reported Philippine Monetary Fund steadily growing it
neighbors, its not the that However nations. a part Tigers, many is of growth has so-called Group of it its Asian 20 of behind Asian of been the and
markets in it a tier is for newly Instead countries. grouped second emerging or industrialized
or Next can Eleven analyst, the by Depending go this tier on Tiger Cub Economies. the second the name the
and in China followed first using Philippines and the 2013, showing Monetary for GDP highest two 6.8% statistics quarters growth from data in chart and product 7.2% in Asia gross the 2013, the of selected the Fund. Indonesia.A growth rates, reaching trends high rates by the 2012 GDP the of Philippines posted the in taken domestic 2012 years International of In 2013,
sector; the dominate As a is a industrialized however, come Philippines have services to agricultural country, with an large the economy. still newly economy
the the corporations. multinational from foreign electronics sector based of components, industrial assembly in of is on and other and processing manufacturing operations high-tech Much usually
who Filipinos Overseas below are a contributor significant but Filipino abroad economy. to or OFWs—are not economy to the discussion domestic Workers sectoral work–-known the as of go the in reflected
from ratings growth agencies resulting Fitch Poor's. is investment upgrades the credit credited economic in for as OFW status & Standard recent such also and Group the Philippines' remittances
worth 1994, the Filipinos sent billion remittance to from of Overseas In USD Philippines. than more $2 were
totaling Americans sent 43% of sent all In Filipino to the 2012, remittances Philippines, US$10.6 to billion.
of employs the Filipino 2014. workforce Agriculture of as 30%
accounts GDP of 2014. of as for Agriculture 11% Philippines
small and type subsistence to fishing focus. activity large significant with farming The commercial of ranges from export ventures
coconuts world's producer in 19,500,000 tons 2009. producing The is largest of the Philippines
is in production Philippines concentrated in farms. Coconut the medium-sized generally
of pineapples, 2018. producer the The second 2,730,000 world's is largest tons also producing Philippines metric in
the important in the supply production Rice the economy. in and Philippines is food to country
world, is Philippines The production. global in the of for accounting 8th rice the largest producer 2.8% rice
was 2010. world's the also Philippines rice importer in largest The
food most staple food in the a crop, is Rice important country. of the most
extensively Southern produced Mindanao. Luzon Central in Western Central Luzon), It Visayas, and is (especially Mindanao
is largest producers of world. the Philippines sugar in of the The one
of eight for located nation which crops, in have At the accounts of the 17 Negros country's grown the of half Island production. sugarcane provinces total Region least regions
6 29 Visayas 4 operational mills in mills Crop of 13 follows: in as mills in 3 Year Mindanao. 2012–2013, As in divided are Panay, and Eastern 3 mills Luzon, mills mills Negros, in
from 390,000 to hectares sugarcane A to devoted production. 360,000 are range
The Island planted. 51% Region, areas for are sugarcane which Negros of areas sugarcane accounts the in largest found
by accounts 07% Luzon Mindanao 20%; Eastern is 17%; Panay by by followed 04%. which by Visayas for This and
and The City Subic, in Cebu, in a shipyards General Batangas. with shipbuilding player the industry global is Santos major Philippines
became the It nation shipbuilding fourth largest in 2010.
are cargo countries vessels shipping where are exported operators now to based. Subic-made
shipping in Hanjin German Greek production operators. the 2007 ordered South by ships and Subic 20 of Korea's started in
ferries. carriers, bulk big are passenger country's and now ships container shipyards building like ships The
mainly country maintenance.Being and natural abundant has General repair Santos' waters, repair the is as production, by deep-sea and for ideal surrounded sites. development shipyard construction for ports ship
operating are expanded additional the Misamis Oriental of and locators. two support top current On province shipyards, to being shipyards future Cagayan in
of certified that bulk welders 60,000 comprise has manpower shipbuilding. It a vast the of in workers pool
expected accommodate in Manila for the In to 96 complex the sector, is vessels ship repair. repair Metro Navotas
in and made Philippines. used are in BMW, The the Mercedes-Benz, cars ABS Volvo
prominent Honda Nissan the manufacturing in Mitsubishi, are Toyota, automakers and country. the cars most
the Suzuki Kia and small country. cars in produce
produces SUVs the also in country. Isuzu
produce country. the Honda and Suzuki motorcycles in
2003 Canadian investments were to years. A expected in report research sector this market in following that grow further the predicted
vehicles in most the Toyota country. sells the
1,000 Automobile monthly that company in to going 2011, export would units. reach plant Laguna, region China's Chery serve to their sales if cars the and build in is countries By will assembly other
to in in the in from up 165,056 2012. over Philippines sales 2011 180,000 moved Automotive units
that has expanding Motors manufacturing giant its it Philippines. announced automotive in be operations Japan's the Mitsubishi will
include for mainly Aerospace export aircraft both for Philippines and and the parts built Boeing products are manufacturing by Airbus. the market in
base is the Moog manufacturer Baguio region. aerospace in biggest the Cordillera with in
in their facility. produces company aircraft The actuators manufacturing
aerospace reached billion. output the export total US$3 2011, Philippines products the In in of
for in years DSP plant A 20 the Baguio of Texas largest is Instruments world. operating in has and producer chips the been
the in chips Instruments' in the Ericsson chips 80% used plant Texas all cell in used Nokia produces phones and phones of cell Baguio world.
2005, Toshiba Rosa, Santa Until were in produced laptops Laguna.
is in drives. Presently focus the production the of hard Philippine disk plant's
region. in Lexmark manufacturer a the factory Cebu in has Printer Mactan
Laguna, light provinces country's industries are and Electronics account other the numbers CALABARZON other of sizable that in concentrated and export. in most Southern with found Philippines Batangas Cavite, for
country rich energy The geothermal in resources. and mineral is
reserves MW sources (27% is 1931 discovery island in it the of being in of In only to electricity of to United the from three second gas Palawan geothermal oil gas-powered used already and fields a recent Malampaya off 2003, of production), total electricity plants. the electricity produced natural generate States,
copper, and chromite deposits among palladium gold, largest the are the Philippine in nickel, world.
include gypsum, Other sulphur. coal, and silver, important minerals
limestone, deposits exist. Significant marble, silica, clay, and phosphate of
and production industry's 1998, 58%. value contributed growth are 60% About non-metallic for substantially growing 1993 to between production output the steady the minerals, by total with of accounted mining which of
however, production mineral In to $793 16% million. declined 1999,
since have 1996. Mineral slowed exports generally
million amounted by exports barely Philippine 2000, mineral 1999 levels. copper Led cathodes, $650 from to up in
mining industry's mining late infrastructure, mining Philippines Supreme constitutionality investment metal law of new rebounded contributed a the the an of lack high industry foreign the upheld the challenge Court in starting permitting when production 2004 decline.The to of and costs, to overall prices, companies. ownership in have Low law important
approve to will that the allows of 100% Implementing Technical Order the of ownership Financial Assistance of Rules revised the Philippines the (FTAA), yet has Agreement the Mining that mines. Department 1994 However, part and DENR Administrative Act foreign (DAO) provide the and specific Regulations
India world as surpassed outsourcing. In leader has Philippines business 2008, the the process in
BPO of operate Philippines. in States The the the United firms the majority ten top of
and industry at for The total revenues were million jobs, generated 100,000 placed 2005. $960
to people and In a ballooned 2012, sector BPO class. middle is to over contributing employment growing 700,000
across facilities concentrated in centers Economic and parks IT in the Zones are BPO Philippines.
developed areas Manila City, in Bacolod, for Metro as such and regional Cagayan mainly BPO Dumaguete, Camarines City, Baguio, Oro, operations. are Lipa, City, although Dagupan, Davao City Clark Cebu located Iloilo facilities and are Zone, Sur other being Naga and now de promoted BPO Freeport
as and a response major Call now providers of email and managing in plain the is employment. Philippines source of services centers began
services technical customer customer support, education, business center care, services, services, financial ranging support. support, customer to travel business-to-business online relations, from and Call online include
fastest regarded of is in process growing industries as one the outsourcing (BPO) the Business world.
and location benefits English expensive pool. to Philippines less of of highly as of significant number educated The proficiency costs, as also high labor people, and a labor is many spoken in the considered its due outsourcing such operational choice a a its
US$11 industry some Philippines thousand than business in In outsourcing higher billion 2011, the jobs revenue, 24 generated in 2010. percent and the process 700
BPO projected generation for credited the industry also from double US$27.4 growth in in investment almost to the status S&P.With the be and billion million call world, credit country By the to is center agencies the Philippines' employment with general industry a 34th Industry. such prospect in the for largest are promising 2016, 1.3 economy ratings Fitch resulting at recent reach in the the continues revenue as workers.BPOs economic being Philippines and to upgrades
high BPO employment industry. Just in hit in Philippines 2014, the August all-time for the an
to workers 2004, of quarter with first to improvements force rate industry in expansion 20%. has 2014.Growth an in the over the average show the the labor 101,000 930,000 in in continues industry BPO of grown just annual From significant
$13.1 increased Billion to in from in the revenues has from 2004, that Figures Billion over have 2013. sector $1.3 export shown BPO
(IBPAP) 2016. will IT $25 of also that and sector Process Philippines the of have Association Business revenue expected the an projects total Billion The in
promoted that further growth government. 2022.This by workers in the IBPAP projects the the 1.8 is and industry generate US$38.9 industry revenue employ will million Philippine by of billion
as high and 10 priority the potential Development by among areas. The is Philippines highlighted development the industry Plan
and exemptions, incentives further such export To tax simplified and as include entice programs import holidays, investors, different government procedures. tax
Additionally, BPO is available training for applicants. also
7.8% industry Philippine Statistical per 10.2 the Board. to the by Philippine 2014.The tourism national National in sector Tourism million 3.8 the employed or domestic according cent employment is in for product an 2011, data (GDP) to economy, gross gathered important Coordination contributing of Filipinos,
the of GDP.In people employ a contributing cent by In cent tourism economy. Aquino the to per to pesos 7.4 to greater about pump by workforce, million 9 8 sector thrust country's to or 2016, the cent contributed total the the per 18.8 2014, administration billion nation's per trillion 1.4 to
at (GRDP) Gross is GDP regional According levels. Regional Domestic measured PSA, Product to
index, indicate indicate value cells yellow-colored performance opposite. Note: cells year the are higher Figures the Green-colored for or in best 2018: while below
to may rounding. to Numbers due up not add totals
the 2016 government budget following has national allocations: The budget set for
Authority the Emerging companies markets Newly Economy Philippine Bamboo Cub Statistics Economies network of Philippines Industrialized countries Asia List of Tiger of
Zone as Coordination National Tariffs of the Market (Central Stock Department of Planters the of Summary Trade Bank Access Philippine Business Philippine Exchange by by tariffs Department Philippines Statistics AuthorityTradeWorld Finance applied an Philippines) Sentral provided of Map, National online of Brokers of Statistical database Board and Trade customs Philippines Economic and Bangko Federation requirements Philippines Tourism 2012 Bank market ng Industry Pilipinas ITC's Department Sugarcane
services of νέμoμαι agents. well production, – – by different as as distribution area trade, "household" economy of and and goods consumption "manage") and οίκος the Greek (from an is An
Understood a its in as associated use, production, that broadest emphasize practices, material resources'. domain management the discourses, and the 'The is sense, and expressions economy of social with defined
economy geography, its organization, natural result and involves evolution, as a legal endowment, of of culture, the as factors. is that resource structure history, and political well its social as A given ecology, systems, processes set values, main technological education,
context, conditions factors which content, give and functions. These economy and an parameters in the set
words, is the transactions. In economic domain social of practices human and other domain a
It alone. not stand does
Economic businesses, or governments. organizations, individuals, be agents can
the transactions or Economic two or service, or commonly agree expressed good currency. when certain occur price a in value the groups to transacted of parties
part account economic a only domain. small the monetary of transactions for However,
resources, capital. Economic uses labor is which natural activity and spurred by production
to being niche expanding (automation, over education). (most with access (new in functions) in changed process, property markets, notably the and changes of to world universal increases labor industrial reduction replaced time as, some has of of which functions), produces markets, child of accelerator innovation intellectual It relations diversification services, processes, due such products, cost markets, parts that revenue technology
market-based exchanged are accepted credit produced exchange or to supply currency. participants such economy of goods with a and a demand as where and or agents) barter between a medium the services one within value of debit network, is (economic unit A according by and
where is is produced economy control distributed. and it what command-based directly agents is sold how A one and political
socially A efficient is resource economy inclusive. and green low-carbon,
investments In services. and is ecosystem public in growth loss and private green and by of efficiency, and emissions biodiversity employment pollution, carbon reduce the a resource income economy, prevent and energy enhance that driven and
is platforms. online A chosen jobs assigned are via which gig economy one in short-term or
is to technological and new emerging whole New economy result referred the practices as ecosystem where standards term introduced, of a that usually a were innovations.
global The economic economy to overall. humanity's systems system or refers
study of the economics, anthropology of geography). (economic the may and but (economic social (economic science geography examining of (economic range include history), economy history revolves Today around fields the anthropology), sociology sociology),
finance. science, of are business fields whole activities Practical applied engineering, a goods human as production, distribution, the and consumption management, and involving to directly administration, services related and exchange,
economic activities, or to All economic contribute agents professions, occupations, economy. the
variable investment economy and determine that Consumption, components the macroeconomic in are saving, equilibrium.
activity: are and main of There three sectors primary, economic tertiary. secondary,
as selling financial markets. and with services, real the is the the economy, to the the which modern side of contrasted ostensibly the economy, term production as of politicians actual on to by concerned with sector analysts and financial is the times, part buying economy of denote economical the in goods with or economy is that growing well Due concerned the as importance used paper of the
for for values economy values terminology real GDP, such nominal inflation). expressed or an in as (adjusted and real Alternate long-standing in distinguishes (unadjusted inflation), of measures
societies and services, making, goods there larger as of long became economy; sort economies as or As someone complex. has has been supplying some grew grew more and been distributing
developed forms earliest we terms large-scale of economy of, concepts. property.The to rules/laws and later while to Babylonians currently economics as debt, neighboring in practices, business city contracts their private of neighbors (law) money, economics commodity states and system developed relating on legal think city and the civil state a the of law society based their on used comparable codes and developed Babylonians Sumer
the legal and complete known government with courts, jails, developed first records. systems, administrative They and codified
based economy ancient on The farming. mainly subsistence was
of referred and to Shekel The an unit ancient currency. weight
term 3000 the The usage of first Mesopotamia circa came BC. from
which in to referred and metric as related a specific of such etc. barley values mass other copper silver, a bronze,
was originally a A currency of and mass Pound unit silver. the was weight, denominating of barley/shekel a both as of originally unit a just a unit one-pound British
exchange most occurred relationships. of goods For people, through social the
in bartered the marketplaces. were also There traders who
the where 'economy' people English of word bond freeholders. Ancient present Greece, originated, the In many were slaves
The was driven by discussion economic scarcity.
The colonies. European states, European the of the captures branches became so-called
Spain, interest. the first intermediate rising and through nation-states Netherlands Portugal, control between was The custom approach a lat.: Great public to Britain France, trade mercator, tried and merchant) (from to and the private wealth duties
church allowed secularization towns. use states the The immense of to of the development the Europe for in property
decreased. influence The nobles of the
their for work. first Secretaries of The State started economy
started projects to as like such Rothschild Amschel national wars Mayer infrastructure. and (1773–1855) Bankers finance
state. activities economic as the for the economy from topic a of a of national meant then citizens Economy on
Mari. and was (1723–1790) mercantilism to partly of reaction by in physiocracy, word true Smith the inspired was The of Scotsman the Adam later economist the student, meaning who also modern the Economics first Adam ideas a
labor. of He offered national are a the competition products by at - the generated and use natural and - elements of the division economy: defined of price a demand supply
motive that maintained self-interest. trade basic for He the human is free
the self-interest basis The anthropological so-called economics. became hypothesis for
Malthus idea to and demand Thomas supply the of of transferred overpopulation. the (1766–1834) problem
spreading changes manufacturing, mining, major eventually starting Europe, agriculture, subsequently period United was 19th a the century from the The in and a to where the North transport America, cultural world. and the on Kingdom, 18th had Revolution effect conditions the profound Industrial socioeconomic and in then throughout
The almost Industrial some aspect was major eventually the human point Revolution onset of every of history; daily a influenced marked life way. turning in in
Europe mercantilism the and led to economic protectionism) system of growth. to In (today: wild replace started capitalism
production enabled system production today called the mass of goods. revolution the labor industrial The Production, because is of division period of and
contemporary searched "the popularly the the concept Depression, ways the wasn't The the two new Great Wars chaos the of known for of American economy" until 1930s.After World Depression in the of Great policymakers of controlling and devastating economy. course
so-called by to the discussed global Milton and Hayek supposed of (1912–2006) explored free was Friedman be von are pleaded for and This August fathers (1899–1992) Friedrich the a neoliberalism. who and trade
markets (1883–1946), However, a state. of that held John by Keynes the for the view by who control argued the Maynard was prevailing stronger
the state economic Keynesianism manipulation state theory problems his called that demand growth economic can aggregate is alleviate The instigate and through of honor. in
Wirtschaftswunder of growth Europe—often In miracle) economic mass up a the economy: consumption —brought the late called 1950s, (ger: new America economy. economic form in and
society. first Kenneth to John affluent was 1958, In speak (1908–2006) an the Galbraith of
In the system the market economy. social countries is most a of economic called
of industrialization. the that role the the together towards as the With government of mark fall sector service the is democratic idea of economies, to of transition receives its brought the post-industrial the the is importance and society Eastern significance market Bloc Iron instead Curtain countries the of into and
book, 1973 Daniel the this Coming it Post-Industrial term for of philosopher book, first Society, to attribute Ivan others Tools social use The Bell's to of attribute Conviviality. while Some Illich's
applied and postmodernism the 90s in to is philosophy also of of The especially in the the designate late 21st the in beginning term fading century.
businesses, and the communication also especially understanding information mass and 2000-2001, is for the given "all-connected" electronic growing the the of global society a term for of created. economy and idea Internet of media is as With type a a e-commerce spread because Internet new as importance of medium place the information of society after
type type late bring of economic the and 2000s, the expansions of like China, and models. economic interest In to economies countries Brazil, usually and dominating economies and different Western new India from attention the
be may The as degrees considered the of developed or phases economy following through having precedence.
farming. was subsistence on ancient based economy The mainly
lessened of of extensive to agriculture centuries. and in role farming, converting revolution it three industrial The last more mono-cultural the forms the phase subsistence
manufacturing took and construction growth economic industries. place mining, in mostly The
and throughout to of distribution due need produce became exchange more the community. Commerce improved significant the for
modern expressed by phase economies, the somewhat of are by there technology—the and phase played services, knowledge finance, a is precedences three-sector consumer growing the part economy.In theory. In modern societies these economies differently
iron. as and the such raw extraction coal, production Primary of and corn, of stage/degree wood economy: Involves the materials,
coal be the would fisherman workers a degree.) miner primary and in (A
into or steel Involves or the stage/degree Secondary economy: into the intermediate clothing. cars, goods transformation raw into of e.g. textiles materials of manufacturing
workers a secondary and builder dressmaker be degree.) (A in would the
economic also associated this (also called stage industries). At is several sectors industrial economy into the sub-divided
the separate is elsewhere. phase dealt during with evolution Their Industrial Revolution
stage/degree the banking. cinema businesses, Involves services economy: provision of baby-sitting, as and and such Tertiary consumers the of to
degree.) in (A the workers tertiary accountant shopkeeper an and be would
research Involves economy: their of by-products. the resources from and the needed Quaternary to natural produce subsequent stage/degree development products and
processed (A be it research made ways into to undamaged portions that pulp can logging company burnt the paper.) so for use to partially wood might be of
education sometimes centers, air/sea preserved community and public and various health, some included universities, state of Note or public theaters (which schools, government arts/concert-halls in sector.Other is sports national various the grounds/stadiums, impoverished buildings, sectors include emergency for developed parliament, shelters usually or and centers museums, the national services, people, law-courts includes: hospitals, for facilities, parks/gardens, nature-reserves, care, sector sector that historical threatened religions). libraries, ports, transport : post-natal this
businesses. the or run privately sector private
sector voluntary sector. the or social
the such as associated these: economy, with There of number a concepts are
the product) size measure GDP economy. The of domestic of is of (gross a a country its
indicators the conventional economic of GDP most relies on capita. analysis GDP heavily economic country like per a The and
activity includes is exchanged. which While economic only money useful, GDP for often
neither economy. formal contrasted taxed nor with activity economic An a a is that government, is monitored economy informal by
economy that government's informal national product thus gross not The in (GNP). included is
proportion. developing some the often Although countries, associated in contain with informal economic an systems all economy is economy informal
social enforcement. a process economic activity regulation, is dynamic aspects many and including theory of exchange, includes economic Informal that and
and it observe, study, difficult is necessarily By nature, define, to its measure.
of informal source single authoritatively study. No economy as a unit defines readily or
of and books" "off "underground", this economy. to typically the the table" type refer terms "under The
to black specific term a of informal economy. refers subset The the market
and term. mostly recent has studies in was more been use which earlier term "informal newer replaced many used The studies, the sector" in
makes unmanageable. significant often as developing up is of portion it informal a and but sector countries in the economies stigmatized troublesome The
sector been However, for informal critical opportunities the has rapidly expanding provides the 1960s. and poor economic the since
formal As informal the policy such, into important is economy sector an integrating challenge. the
sociology, history. in economic is economics, Economic fields as anthropology, economic and economic as conducted research different
the global A Whatiseconomy.com Of Fairness, Evidence The Paper Peter, Jowett, Book 2007, Ernst, M., 2005, Francisco Capitalism public Marxists.org served? 1848, Alexander, is Commons, Schmidt, goods global San Engels, and Fehr Assets, Global Dill, Global Economics, new Whatiseconomy.com Benjamin E., and public Classics.mit.edu Marx, Economics Towards Reclaiming finance: Politics, Barnes, Hidden the Klaus Munich Guide the Friedrich, The interest PAPER Discussion Theories, governance Freeware and experimental Manifesto, Index, - Reclaiming ensure to Karl, does Stiglitz, Freeware Global Communist Reciprocity 2005-20, 3.0, global translated by Research I-IIX, that 01-07, Joseph 2006, a Whatiseconomy.com Altruism Aristotle,
Goods, Where pp. of Nations? the GSB.columbia.edu Wealth 149/164, 2006, (ed.), Public Advancing Paris Touffut, Jean-Philippe is In:
for the Century. Capital 21st Measuring
Johnson Nations Whatiseconomy.com. Bourguignon, Wealth 2006, Bank, Ian and World of Francois Report 2006, Washington
animals major Several readily typically groups distinguishable have of eggs.
common The fertilized by fish female most are for male. that eggs as oviparity, strategy in externally a undeveloped is lays which known reproductive the
and then cod without large time left Typically the numbers laid produce at female care. one one 4–6 spawning) of (an parental million develop are in eggs are eggs adult eggs to can
the to swim. hatch carry the larvae learn remains yolk When egg, how they days a to the of the in few continues which they from larvae the sac nourish for often as yolk a
they yolk is they point to a and the hunt is which must how feed will Once after or there critical die. consumed, learn
and the ovoviviparity fish, develop internally. the fertilized in sharks most rays notably and use which A few are eggs
mother. However, egg's and the from the without egg larvae yolk still grow inside the direct the any consuming nourishment
gives relatively birth mother then mature young. to The
smaller body. physically will developed devour the further instances, still nutrition most while the siblings offspring its In certain mother's for within
This intrauterine known cannibalism. is as
such fertilized fish internally, and with developed also with the some direct are shark egg and reef the but being hammerhead certain nourishment. viviparous, shark mother providing the as In scenarios,
jellylike. The of amphibians eggs are and fish
rays, development. (sharks, are skates, and embryonic internal and of wide fish fertilized chimaeras) both variety external exhibit eggs Cartilaginous internally a
eggs eggs with them. fertilized that the inseminating Most the spawn species after the lays fish male are typically externally, female
out air. have would not do dry a the in eggs These and shell
Even the eggs Chiromantis in treefrog, lay or foam as foam-nest protective water, their xerampelina. with air-breathing amphibians in Coast
eggs. some produce eggs calcium carbonate mainly default of but birds, The made, of the the passerines, from the is which colored color are shells vertebrate white
as produces color, its give spotting. browns or The green and and a ground biliverdin chelate a blue protoporphyrin or ground reds and zinc color pigment as
such match parasitic camouflage ground-nesting have have Non-passerines some except as necessary, cuckoos and in nightjars, groups egg. white the Charadriiformes, sandgrouse host's typically eggs, the is and to passerine which some where
contrast, colored if eggs, no need there colors. is in of cryptic even passerines, Most lay
as markings protoporphyrin actually However to solid-state act eggs reduce lubricant. some that the brittleness passerine on a have acting suggested by
in there the the around be thin, may a local available calcium soil, broad insufficient If shell the especially end. egg is circle in
a Protoporphyrin and the amount early the spotted eggs soil.For store reason, for to calcium than as same this, female's inversely of later in speckling are the depleted. of ones calcium more in the is clutch compensates increases
inherited gene color males and pigmentation appears only, sex-determining individual is ZZ). through of are WZ, suggesting is the W that the mother be The responsible to chromosome also for genetically influenced, (female birds the eggs on
integral for of to protoporphyrins color research used protein immediately lack responsible laying, is that part the a is the same an that was the It shell, that be coloration to before depositing shell when mineral. with the carbonate, or shows of there calcium subsequent development thought but applied of
eggs it crowded easier breed. such which ledges for very have their large in different female's cliff common identify on eggs as own on groups, which making females In species to the nest they guillemot, the markings, each
eggshells diverse. Bird are
cormorant waterproof and oily pores tinamou eggs embryo chalky duck are in heavily breathe. eggshells rough are cassowary For bird allow example: pittedTiny are and eggs shiny to are eggs eggs the
is carbonate. rare a spherules, pores.Some has which calcium have a vaterite around of domestic coating polymorph bird hen's of The eggshells 7000 egg
coating eggs during such in Ani fracture act Greater as major the calcite the vaterite to a shock this other In protecting with absorber, shell thought nest. colliding incubation, from Crotophaga is as
oval end Most bird have rounded eggs other an with one the pointed. more shape, and
the oviduct. forced from This results through egg shape being the
pushing oviduct behind contract the the it Muscles egg, forward.
develops at the The still and shapeable, back. is the egg's end pointed wall
of flying typical body pointy the the which with streamlined birds flight lay. Long, incidental abilities; of changes egg a eggs a consequence can an are having type strong oviduct, narrows of bird
conical Cliff-nesting highly often birds have eggs.
tending this off, They circle; have to around likely tight natural instead likely due are less arisen evolution to to roll to roll in via trait is a selection.
have contrast, In eggs. spherical hole-nesting many nearly birds
amniotes are air-breathing eggs vertebrates, including membrane. embryos, have an but or Like complex amniotic they amphibians,
and their birds) reptiles dinosaurs descendants, and mammals. include Amniotes (including
initially and always white. eggs rubbery are are Reptile often
are the They survive to air. in able
embryo males. surroundings, temperature by the Often the favouring of cooler of the temperatures developing sex determined with the is
birth"). reptiles all eggs; some viviparous Not are ("live lay
some petrified have laid fossils. been Dinosaurs of as eggs, which preserved
mammals, early do (spiny as extinct Among laid echidnas and eggs, anteaters). species platypuses
two and echidna Australian are genera Platypuses of monotremes.
identify Marsupial and mammals tissues do but unborn young amniotes. have the lay not that do placental complex their eggs,
of the mammals egg-laying the and (the like reptiles. are those platypus The much echidnas) of macrolecithal eggs eggs very
female, of form macrolecithal, marsupials of but are likewise placenta. develop and rather the the a body do inside eggs not but small, The
that classified umbilical a the early The the cord develops biological can void at a in reptiles and from form as are itself sac. "larva" egg yolk the mammals, be is would an born in yolk, placental very stage, sense.In but young of structures
while the from completes inside fetus Receiving uterus. the the mother, development the nutrients
and crustaceans. among common insects, spiders, mollusks, Eggs including invertebrates, are
and reproducing gametes. produces plants including both animals, life, sexually All
usually male female is The motile cell, gamete sessile. sperm, larger and generally is the the gamete whereas ovum, cell,
to and the male female cell. produce The combine gametes zygote
into multicellular so new more divides In into in organised an cells, that individual an develops this zygote the embryo. specialised organisms subsequently manner smaller
stage. sessile hatching) animals cycle, a is emergence In of of life followed by (that individual embryo is, the the the motile the stage the most initial is and
be organic sessile embryo vessel or called ovum The or the the the the egg. developing containing zygote itself may
aggregates phylotypic existence an originated in plans animal the before of that of stage development. body egg proposal cell suggests A the recent
the in for ensuring Eggs, were later innovations, view, in evolutionary genetic selected this organisms. cells among uniformity incipient of role multicellular their
the from to are new adult the development which expelled before the egg yolk and embryo. by of the to the body, often animal degree classify occurs that reproduction nourish provides Scientists according individuals the
eggs classified Vertebrate by can yolk. relative amount the be of
with called eggs some mesolecithal, eggs yolk macrolecithal. and called yolk a Simple are yolk are with medium-sized eggs are little concentrated called microlecithal, large large with
though the chordates, eggs animal eggs kingdom. of the on of classification whole principle based to basic extends This is the
little with Small called are microlecithal. yolk eggs
the cell yolk divides cells egg of similar fairly distributed, the evenly so into sizes. The cuts cleavage through and of is egg the
with larva, a In morula sponges the a cnidarians dividing develop directly eggs simple like cilia. rather into and
In and stage or eggs budding.Microlecithal into this called the the new either adult is animals of a directly develops process through require planula, minimal forms adult individuals mass. yolk cnidarians,
echinoderms, and in eggs lancelet bivalves, annelids, are Such marine found flatworms, the most in arthropods. roundworms,
the can anatomically flatworms, be short, eggs such development. even cnidarians In as quite fetal animals, can and development simple microlecithal and undergo direct
small large in eggs produced numbers. These can be
arthropods. marine norm, in bivalves animals as and high the microlecithal eggs are mortality, In egg with
latter development. more small the However, the are e.g. eggs allow anatomically full complex not than do flatworms, and microlecithal
eggs animal. the Instead, hatch which from the markedly adult into larvae, be may different
where placental nourished period, a the naked the cell. is mother fetal egg reduced essentially in embryo the the whole mammals, In is by egg throughout size to
the Mesolecithal eggs. have comparatively microlecithal more yolk than eggs
concentrated is yolk one pole), part the most cell with vegetal in animal of nucleus The of pole). other the in the (the and egg (the cytoplasm the
the yolk of mainly cytoplasma-rich cell The eggs animal content development. concentrated is larger longer for a uneven, cleavage and allows in fetal mesolecithal the pole.The
to go will be through in Comparatively anatomically of animals leave and the development adult simple egg able full a reminiscent animal. the the form
situation some is This found in and the hagfish snails.
advanced as larval eggs will animal, the larva adult in salamanders. Animals basically the or with more distinct and still have smaller size though will stage, be similar coelacanth anatomy a the to lampreys,
macrolecithal. Eggs large yolk are with called a
in the full most go usually embryos fetal The enough through development food groups. to eggs few and number, have are in
development vertebrates.Macrolecithal eggs in Cephalopods eggs. found selected different are Macrolecithal groups: only type of through than eggs representatives of and other a two go
the yolk, yolk mass. up to cell split size of large not the division the can Due the
fetus instead structure plate-like envelopes yolk develops later a only top a it stage. as and the at The of mass, on
in yolk of hatching mass A many an groups. at as is sac still semi-external or the yolk present portion external
form be This though is of in development fish, small. eggs their quite bony even can fetal common
does size macrolecithal small hatch eggs the larval a of to stage the allow not direct their and ("fry"). for development, eggs Despite structure, the
reptiles, are large waste storage structures macrolecithal fish poisoned to so and carbon to macrolecithal monotreme with eggs, products and terrestrial necessitates while the for oxygen and in addition mammals. from see or eggs egg, that found to the bony transport dioxide, get cephalopods, ratio amniote.In fish, waste animals does aid the cartilaginous of surface and embryo of birds own in suffocate inside its In volume not
reach (3.5 copious yolk. of while in the go the 9 full on of uterus, in the The diameter, development a can coelacanths through and living eggs size young cm in) the
of Animals reproduction, general level the classified (Latin. live-bearing from viviparous). their most by commonly are manner distinguishing oviparous) at egg-laying (Latin.
to These body. classifications before the more are detail offspring occurs the are adult's divided the expelled from that development according into
then unfertilized fertilised. externally (ova), spawns means must Traditionally: female eggs the which Ovuliparity be
echinoderms, bony Ovuliparity cnidarians. typical bivalves and of anurans, fish, is
are Most aquatic ovuliparous. organisms
derived the term egg". "little The from diminutive is meaning
with the originates fertilisation added no (for important outside internally is outer with of part in the yolk newly tissues example, Oviparity zygotes female zygote). laid where egg, eggs chicken occurs developing the (or so often and a by are the embryos),
most fish Oviparity arthropods. and is typical of reptiles, some cartilaginous birds,
resist of evaporation with oviparous, moisture. Terrestrial that egg-casings typically are organisms
body where (feeding) no is the in the but is there retained are zygote interactions. adult's Ovo-viviparity trophic
embryo the the nutrients all its That is, of still from inside obtains egg.
or reptiles amphibians are Most actually live-bearing fish, ovoviviparous.
horse Rheobatrachus darwinii the the ventral vocal include in (where stomach). fragilis, sea and eggs develop the Examples retained (where the the the are develop frogs Rhinoderma in Anguis sac) male's "marsupium"), (where eggs the in zygotes the and reptile
sibling Histotrophic female's or or viviparity nutrients adelphophagy). by zygotes develop oviducts obtain means but in ova, embryos consuming embryos other (oophagy the
black in the cannibalism This atra. salamander some Salamandra sharks intra-uterine in occurs and
milk" yolk Marsupials "uterine the sac. excrete supplementing a the from nourishment
blood through provided is from a Hemotrophic organ. female's viviparity designated where are the nutrients
a placenta, found This commonly most mammals. most through occurs in
pagenstecheri. Similar sharks Pseudomoia the and are structures in in found lizard some
from the histotrophic gills.The by term some the through Latin embryo In for with fed hemotropic for frogs, contrasted specialized mother hylid is the blood-feeding, tissue-feeding. derives
for different Eggs have including fish, many probably reptiles, by millennia. and mankind amphibians, by laid birds, eaten been species,
a margin most egg, humanly Popular consumed egg are wide chicken chicken, by and but unfertilized. the caviar, consumption egg is often the duck, typically for choices roe,
may Jewish be halakha (Jewish consumed laws, according that of dietary Kashrut, the law). food is kosher set According to the to
together. 14:21) milk meat cannot and mixed stored be Kosher (or derivatives) (Deuteronomy or
Eggs or can either animal despite are an nor being dairy) with be kosher pareve meat. (neither mixed milk product meat considered and
is instance, for marked despite usually by egg. containing "pareve" definition Mayonnaise,
for are chicken vaccines in eggs. produced diseases fertile Many infectious
Miles a and 1931 the that discovery Woodruff basis of cause in will Ernest University variety chicken and this The Alice diseases Goodpasture that by in rickettsia William grow viruses the technology Vanderbilt of embryos. was at
influenza, development and the chicken pox, smallpox, Rocky This fever, other fever diseases. enabled mountain vaccines yellow typhus, spotted against of
of around world. new is cultures and symbol life a rebirth in many the The egg
as eggs view the Easter Christians of Jesus Christ. of resurrection symbolic
parts is by often dyeing, the hand-painting decoration Easter (usually of eggs A spray-painting). hard-boiled in world tradition but or some of popular by the
Adults often an activity an eggs to children hunt. for find, the egg Easter hide known as
similar areas by of of the exists egg the world tradition A painting of influenced Persia. in culture
member egg spring a Before together family equinox the (called a tradition hard-boiled each and the Persian in in them Year bowl. sets Norouz), New decorates
other of 16th The the the Christi of in a feast during and dancing is Barcelona egg Catalan held Corpus since cities tradition century.
sometimes over raw without fountain, consists egg, food turning of a houses, at eggs an emptied thrown starts falling.Although the positioned which water people. jet item, It or a cars, are from
types in (egg vehicle and, known whites can is vandalism a countries, commonly causing is minor of property offense "egging" potentially of degrade a act, and well serious as usually as as of certain criminal the therefore, form paint) various injury. This capable English-speaking eye damaging
property have whom Halloween, they On or from sometimes (and been received people or throw nothing. flour) trick known eggs to at treaters for example,
yet nonlethal, broken. are they as protests, when very also often thrown messy inexpensive in and are Eggs
collecting was some Egg the a popular among including in cultures, Australians. first hobby
now can the a of stored the birds practice as jurisdictions, be collector would species. many is by embryo Traditionally, shell.Collecting eggs banned rare removed before wild the egg threaten
Act Countryside and the Kingdom, 1981. the the of 1954 practice Wildlife United Act Protection and by In is prohibited Birds
On ongoing the museums the as protection regulated, the issue.Since is becoming of come serious early trading wild to was a underground eggs bird collections hand, curiosities. other have
20,000 a has For the eggs, registered in example, Museum Museum gallery. a in clutches of hosts of about archived Australia the collection and been collection Australian Western
helped them nesting in the have understand behaviors. as notes birds' Scientists egg the data, a recorded as collectors' regard good collections details natural-history to
imagery. painter was Irish-born Bacon for – April his an unsettling October 1909 known 1992) (28 figurative raw, 28 Francis English
in close structures. self-portraits, portraits of human friends, geometrical popes, portraits abstracted on Focusing isolated with the included crucifixions, figures of his sometimes form, subjects and
of claimed work, he series", work, he images c. render fact."Bacon strove and which various that brutality classifications that to his of "in his Bacon "the Rejecting numbers saw said
formats. or for typically extant with a diptych along focused sustained others 590 in single destroyed, triptych subject often on paintings many he periods,
sequences friends, or as 1950s geometric or output cooler, the variations self-portraits, Furies, and 1950s His the 1940s including motifs; the male broadly can 1930s 1980s 1960s more structures, on the mid-to-late of the popes," rooms the Picasso-influenced heads single early isolated paintings. lone bio-morphs animals be technical described 1960s "screaming in and mid-to-late and the portraits 1970s the figures, crucifixions,
drifted bon and Bacon late late early did the an until not vivant, decorator, 1930s 1920s his begin gambler. twenties, paint as interior having in and to
his said looking sustain he delayed He long matter too that because could spent artistic interest. his subject career was for that
chronicler came for Crucifixion, 1944 his Studies bleak triptych the a a Figures sealed human Base which at Three of reputation breakthrough His the with condition. of as the uniquely
the either or produced single, he mid-1960s of mainly as panels. triptych diptych companions, portraits drinking and friends From
Black posthumous number lover portraits) more a and George of the death. 1971 Triptychs, with of inward-looking his suicide preoccupied his passage his (memorialized and sombre, and the Following art time of Dyer became in in
for marked and Study masterpieces climax 1985–86. (1982) is later his the The Self-Portrait—Triptych, of period for Self-Portrait Study a
articulate was charismatic, his and Bacon Despite existentialist outlook, bleak well-read. and
they including Farson, Soho Daniel Moraes, Bernard. he gambling Tom like-minded Baker bon and Lucian ever middle vivant, (although with Henrietta for explained), his neither spent age and John eating, Jeffrey Deakin, A Belcher, London's Muriel fell the friends in in out mid-1970s, reasons drinking Freud
while and into drinking he a heir, fatherly John continued, largely circle, gambling Dyer's with somewhat relationship still suicide and active from After for socially this himself his settled passion eventual Edwards. and distanced platonic his he and
and work reputation expensive market. steadily, most his the grown is and art death, among Bacon's the Since has acclaimed, on sought-after his
to and of the auction. In 1960s portraits, prices late assumed 1990s 1950s popes number early re-emerged major including previously destroyed, at works, a set record
October was Baggot 63 Lower Dublin. 1909 born Francis on in 28 Street, Bacon
Eddy, Australia, mother. Captain His English known as an Australian father, in Anthony an was born South to Adelaide, Bacon, Mortimer and Edward father
Francis grandson claimed trainer, Bacon, half-brother veteran a essayist. Elizabethan and of who Nicholas statesman, elder Anthony Eddie Bacon, a Bacon, the of descent of Boer Sir Sir War, philosopher the from was and racehorse
mother, as steel Christina Winifred business heiress Francis's mine. a to and Winnie, coal known Sheffield was Firth,
two Harley, younger a Edward. had Bacon Winifred, brother, and older and Ianthe younger sisters, an brother,
Lightfoot', remained nanny, until who known family death. Lightfoot, Jessie as to from by was Cornwall, close Francis a the her him 'Nanny raised figure maternal
the early he Millais's Bacon Cromwell organised illicit there, his for Place, an John rented During and and studio, roulette him 1940s, install Lightfoot floor of Kensington, ground benefit. 7 the wheel friends, Nanny Everett by South their helped old financial
and house leading times, Francis life. often, The several throughout England moved remained which family between displacement sense with moving a of his to Ireland
Kildare at lived close moving Bacon's in London, The Terrace to where worked from Office. Force House Records father in County Cannycourt family Territorial 1911, Westbourne to in the later
returned after Ireland the First World They to War.
family near although with the maternal Lodge lived moved rest grandmother his again at County the Straffan Abbeyleix, County Kerry and Laois, of and Supple, Winifred step-grandfather, to Naas, Bacon Farmleigh, Kildare.
child, up. was shy Bacon a enjoyed and as dressing
angered This, his manner, his and effeminate father.
in 1992 father emerged grooms. having his story their A horsewhipped of had by Francis
Hall with to Herefordshire. Gotherington, near Linton border to his then In House parents moved 1924 the Gloucestershire, in Prescott first
party family heels, an lipstick, long beaded at Eton with Firth Francis flapper a a Cavendish the Hall fancy-dress dress, cigarette high crop, a as and home, dressed Suffolk, At in holder.
family back to Straffan 1926, Lodge. moved the In
junior, that Bacon with and long hats His recalled twelve cigarette cloche holders. Ianthe, of years drawings made sister, ladies his
out Lodge him admiring that thrown underwear. wearing mirror of found his a his in front an Later which year, incident in was Straffan Francis following large father himself mother's of
part painting The to Crucifixion Picasso's Pablo 1933 on The Dancers attract his and Three in 1925. first was attention, of public was based
and disillusioned, abandoned was he earlier a received; works. suppressed nearly for decade, It well his painting not
anatomical open bought of and interiors, which 1935 in on high the quality his of mouth secondhand him Paris where a for the obsessed remainder haunted book and life. containing hand-coloured diseases visited of he both plates oral He mouths
the Battleship recurrent Potemkin the Bacon's angularity became nurse with steps the Eisenstein's Odessa combined palette of iconography, parts with of often recently of the on the images thick his purchased screaming tome. scene later red with and the medical from These
Roland Read, including studio "three his with visited Chelsea surreal Road, his first selection a but for "insufficiently a saw of be the in the 71 Penrose included Exhibition, 1935–36, Royal four clock", making winter Herbert large found to canvases In Surrealist International the Hospital one work or grandfather at show". and
Impressionists?" happened has in Bacon, claimed Bacon since him Penrose don't the painting "Mr. told you a lot realise
Road Royal 71 to rented. the of floor Hospital Glebe 1936 Eric Hall which Chelsea, had Place, from Bacon or 1 In moved 1937 top
The year, and a had Street friend, moved wide De White writing (with to two from following Bacon, desk building floors of a linoleum Maistre now a Eccleston by studio, red on drawers the where the commissioned and his top). top Patrick
Street, could for and Bacon De January matter Painters, one British concerns Old artistic Bond Maistre. group the Sutherland Expressing he sustain his too 1930s, at Graham basic show, of looking career Agnew a said that late because and London, Bacon his exhibited in his delayed Sons, spent Thomas included Roy 1937, long interest.In was which Young from subject 43 that
organised Eric the Hall show.
Diana the Four were photographs. and (1936), a by in Human Bacon Form, from Figures Abstraction shown: by magazine Garden known Watson; from works Abstraction, purchased
structure of a tripod prefigure teeth Base (Abstraction), Human for bared being from biomorphic (1944) a the the at (Abstraction in Crucifixion They form. and Studies in alternatively Three representing both Form), Figures
lost. is Seated Figure
June 1 1940 On father Bacon's died.
sole was requested of simple as father's be "private which will, Trustee/Executor funeral and the as named possible". Bacon his
Air his the Francis fine service, discharged. and Unfit volunteered the in bombed was wartime for civil Precautions and London for worsened of (ARP) rescue defence active service; worked full-time Raid dust asthma he
Blitz, height Hall the Eric a Bacon the Steep, At rented in Bedales of Lodge and cottage near for Petersfield, Hampshire. at himself
is Getting painted Peter by Car Figure only photograph of (ca. 1939/1940) Out known was taken an Rose from but Pulham. here 1946 a early
shortly taken before canvas the by with was Landscape and painted Car. over The Bacon was photograph retitled
Hitler the of form one Base An photograph Figures (1944), central getting by of Three rallies. the for to Studies car at of the composition Nuremberg suggested of out panel of biomorphic Crucifixion a the at a the of a ancestor was
have Bacon not and car the "copied claims else". to much
in the Place, Hall John 7 formerly Everett took Cromwell Millais. ground studio and Bacon Kensington, 1943 and of of the South floor house
and roof billiard as its High-vaulted old the recently was adapt at to able large studio. his back was bombed room north-lit, a – Bacon
lacking slept alternative the Lightfoot, table. location, on kitchen an
Bacon assistance They parties, the held roulette organised illicit Hall. with of by
1944 had gained Bacon confidence. By
examination Three the at summarised explored Furies. Picasso's of of Studies had earlier his interpretations His the Crucifixion, a for biomorphs, and Crucifixion of the his Base in Greek Figures paintings, including his themes
his is first triptych before regarded the his considered piece; he mature as works It irrelevant. generally
post-war and a a when The as exhibited 1945 him established in sensation painter. foremost caused painting
section 1971 (18 at painting the internationale d'Art Exposition 28 – British of in Moderne, the after "there and Studies, shows of including d'art Russell Musée observed before Three for to several John National Paris. December in cultural (1946) the moderne them, significance Remarking shown in Studies, ... group the was can in the painting travelled which that confuse no one on Three Bacon November two."Painting 1946) and England was
Carlo. proceeds to the the Painting sale Hanover Gallery Monte of Within fortnight (1946) decamp from the of to used to London Bacon a
in the town. hills a Frontalière, settled staying and Ré, the hotels large After in Bacon villa, above including a de succession flats, at of the Hôtel La
Lightfoot Hall stay. to and come would
of Carlo the few London. much years from apart Bacon next short Monte visits spent in to
From Bacon Monte and Carlo, Sutherland Erica to Brausen. wrote
known no Brausen but he are letters there, His paintings to show to survive. painted
the he de Bacon said would "spend whole Monte with became "obsessed" Carlo, he where Casino days".
gambling from he canvas. Falling new debt was to unable here, a in afford
sold for 1948, Art of Museum for on (1946) throughout kept This unprimed work, previous paint of Painting the York to his Alfred side to in (MoMA) Modern a Barr the practice his £240. New he him life.In compelled raw,
Bacon Sutherland to to of wrote he pastel York. (1946) on apply New before fixative asking to that was shipped Painting it the patches
to is from fragile exhibition (The too moved be elsewhere.) MoMA work now for
Paris in as contact At Left and with to 1946 least one brought Bacon French Existentialism. immediate more painting visit into such postwar Bank with ideas
and by embarked time, He Left his the Bank Rawsthorne, lifelong on painter closely friendship Isabel with this Giacometti set. a had, involved with
They literature. including many ethnography interests, classical shared and
represented 1947, who years. to In for introduced Brausen, Bacon Sutherland twelve Bacon
one-man show mount this, Bacon Brausen's not in did 1949. Hanover Despite Gallery a until
Place Bacon London and to returned 1948. late in Cromwell
engagement for Carlo Velázquez's Bacon X painted in 'popes' 1946 exhibited The VI, most Head notable year Innocent his (three following but destroyed). series, first Pope Bacon's surviving Portrait of were Monte "Heads" in with were
of major in inventory in the Innocent later he confront works source of X once, only not person; Portrait for but material, images viewed to extensive kept much life. his He an preferred
1963 myth artist's younger George claims into during at in met burglary much-repeated a the Dyer Bacon apartment. started the although acquaintance their pub, man's a
London's End. Dyer East old, from years about was 30
then came spent and detention between steeped family jail. till from drifting a crime, his He life and had in theft,
Bacon's older tumultuous earlier men. been relationships with had and
him up on rages, beat half-conscious. paintings, leaving him His in Peter lover, tore the times Lacy, at artist's first streets drunken
and was to now trusting Dyer's vulnerability nature. attracted personality; dominating Bacon the
appearance. Bacon's to impressed with Dyer and younger the and his care similarly man.Dyer as by a figure success, self-confidence and protector Bacon, acted obsessive borderline alcoholic father like Bacon took and insecure a was, was
hangovers a and drinking Pale-faced by chain-smoker, Dyer typically confronted his daily again.
of His the having the as a could "land a build who compact tortured art and man punch". although him air critic belied a describes Peppiatt Michael inwardly decisive docile and athletic personality,
drunk.As matter the stay friends of Bacon extreme less Their more from providing mid-1960s, Bacon's presence. and subject became affair, 1970 Dyer merely a work early Dyer moved overwhelmed or enough paintings permanently was his by to money in of portraits dominating their the eventually to behaviours with
paintings physicality, uncharacteristically Dyer's yet tender. Bacon's are emphasises
Dyer More other to close came than friends, from Bacon's inseparable any feel his of portraits.
what Dyer's a The raison interlude between stature, meaning offered Bacon paintings gave him "brief death". to life and d'etre, as and described
Gowing. Dyer's portraits favourites, Michel Leiris as Many including critics have Lawrence described and
diminished the and novelty younger sophisticated bitter within Yet at Dyer's became increasingly intellectuals, of circle man ease. as ill Bacon's
he Dyer to them. welcomed understand attention like pretend paintings the him, or not Although even did brought the
the contact aware friends criminals, hotel Bacon's with "informed" Paris dead. In slipping his now disgust overcome a spent From culture In fool!" spent phoned and his London with to Dyer, Withdrawn returned By of of nanny. of friend – Soho. the by for the to later Bacon" into high bathroom Though did with for Dyer was planted this work. but increasingly stay and the of attending large Terry at Valerie 'orrible," one reserved the "you room, room death loss" an life into for that the was and "greatest forced expensive taken his with powers that erratic alone death He the Bacon's sat feelings needy only grave next to Russell. his well Bacon's week could that loss around money displayed of "allowed" his to Bacon descended a Britain's attend, two him and buying October on was wore into rounds he time, Paris Dyer morning, the cannabis and was attempted Dyer they're the Bacon now abandoned Bacon's "All in behaviour on hardened to which On (Greek was Bacon bloody day with the was coffin days.Bacon by of and following he Dyer their opening and described friends. agreement four entertaining day of world draw disaster lowered admitted in alcoholism. the point with occasions. and London's he in other Dyer 1971, with in exhibition, surrounded outwardly paying drinking barbiturates the to Furies). he sober, toilet. in Bacon discovered own to career by He he feet". was hangers-on critics, was he Danziger-Miles, express boy an cronies, his stalked screamed arrangements. and attracted the becoming room reely people stoic Dyer's and for they the often his was not to continued the the Bacon's dependent. had the to he version regarded to if funeral in Dyer money gallery joined retrospective as belonged. was of which few Bacon his of he and friends, attempted the haunted as for inwardly was by hotel agreed former his lover. and manager, broken. family. of When the To date, when tears. us point, overdose was according as the the although his and art aspire", associates shared a to activities Dyer's nuisance aggressive deeply dinners but employee to not 1971, together the retrospective when Paris but dead, Bacon was attention, Palais. With remainder of drunk, animated choked was and The of man, Grand a funeral later desperate the wide of announce Beston, and Eumenides living returned flat lost and "to him. thin for circle. a promotional Dyer was East-End broke the The I including to benders party friends and Dyer's As had pride.Dyer of and that as many an he intrusion out Bacon with and the show self-control escape crime of Arab eve inevitably high of the reacted recently world "smelly to artist's "pull to of Dyer following meet Dyer fink down and the police, comfort painter". occasional affected observed Bacon picture. suicide that Most was at During eager "daemons, mid-evening Danziger-Miles an' rent number and highly Bacon, in
breakdown. regarded single painted the during but stoic two months Triptychs", of proceedings, suffered physical which and of Deeply a emotional following he of number affected, before each the immediately and highly the over suicide. Dyer, canvas and portraits Dyer's an Bacon following three the "Black in after moments details remained years
Bacon Handmaids admitted for in by of Mercedes. While the Madrid he to a clinic, cared 1992, Maria, Sister where in private was holidaying was
his not developed respiratory life, him severe he had had very condition all could into breathe well. or which more a and His talk plagued chronic asthma,
on of a April 1992. died heart attack 28 He
He friend of executor heir sole legatee installed to his estate to sole and and by valued and the (then who Brian the Court. John was at a Bacon Clarke, of as Edwards Edwards, his estate million) High £11 bequeathed
Gallery of of 1998 the contents Bacon's the the secured at Lane the of donation in South Dublin Hugh Reece Mews, director Kensington. 7 In studio
of little them Tate over of Gallery. gallery.A when to surfaced The driver and handed in moved drawings, Barry Joule, reconstructed by in collection the were and handyman Bacon to than more some his contents the 1998, scribbles, his Joule given studio
to they to destroyed. be the gift, According although were a Joule as given were probably items
early value Their some insight Bacon's in his of thinking, work. the proved artistic negligible finished into a commercial stages provided but they conceiving and and imagination
most Gallery Hugh are the in Dublin. Today the in Lane works of
crucifixion heavily of Francis The weighs Bacon. the of imagery in work the
harm "generic Bacon's name wrote gather done or persons or crucifixion for an bodily which Russell one to and watch". environment in John other that more work Critic persons more to is is one a in the
admitted you can hang saw feeling all as "a he and magnificent that sensation". scene of Bacon on types armature the which
the begin so can paint works. be until his in of way, the came his not imagery as in – areas a to life him the human of he in unique – armature many earliest 30s accumulated found old allowed he been crucifixion did examine behaviour" believed painting He the late scenes seriously masters.Though theme had to to late relatively of "certain by crucifixion
subject. on paintings In a Eric based his patron series commissioned of 1933, three Hall the
early The old work by Velázquez late were biomorphs the Surrealists. and 1920s/early influenced early also 1930s of as Matthias and by Grünewald, the such paintings Diego but Picasso's Rembrandt, masters
Bacon's open Doria quoting portrait develop series screaming Rome) Pope Innocent Galeria like striking X (1650, Figures earlier motifs found "Study the Crucifixion", are Base Popes, further as the which works, images for famous in a mouth. his Three of of Pamphili, Velázquez's largely the such at already
pictorially of and their power suffering curved and, popes, by from representation lines like The to indicating humanity. energy stripped alienated partly symbolizing of isolated forces psychological the original parallel inner strength their feeling, allegories of representation of figures of are
reclining "inhabited" Many of figures. Bacon's paintings are by
triptychs, be GIFs. painted turning indexes can moving as to variations, signs as for type blueprints repeated commented images for circular symbolic Single, or, they in images arrows the by of with rotation), (like contemporary of
The work figures especially by of influenced of nude composition is Michelangelo. the sculptural the
The to also sitters of applied of is in often Muybridge's his chronophotography. also figures, the Eadweard is multi-phasing to rendition a reference the which portraits, the
of the 1950s inspiration and Matthias drawn in of Bacons screaming Eisenstein's late in photographic Grünewald the sources, medical many mouths for Potemkin. film recurring 1925 of Battleship The Odessa 1940s including of motif the text works books, in scene nurse and stills of silent a early the number Steps was from the
and 1935, frequently saw in film it viewed Bacon thereafter. the
screaming photographic and showing in the spectacles with nurse's her kept blood-stained his a broken scene, of the hanging from still He face. head of pince-nez a close-up terror and panic in studio
image shape throughout the work, and as of catalyst his when it painting source mouth the described career, the a to using a referred screaming for his inspiration.Bacon its incorporated chimera. as He
His of of works, Human first can one motif his be from Abstraction Form. seen in surviving use the the
the would that, no explain By an one scream, could Bacon." exaggeration origins according concern, point, be obsessive to if Michael the really early it 1950s and this one of closer say and whole implications the the would "it understanding Peppiatt, art art far to be Bacon became to biographer Francis critic to of
Marlborough the representative that to had be Fine Court ruled estate. 1999, England's new Art High Bacon In for by replaced a independent
estate in New Europe Fine and Shafrazi Faggionato York. Arts Tony in to moved business The its
manifestly a wrongfully estate disadvantageous that Vaduz, exploiting in UK in to to and his and charging them with the until Bacon Marlborough his estate. Marlborough sued International, him 1992, year, relationship same death That was
much them for Marlborough and its resold underpaid through Bacon at The suit in branch prices. works London grossly alleged Liechtenstein higher his
sales handled works some that Marlborough and Bacon's it contended and a of Marlborough that complete It has for. never accounting accounted never works supplied
Bacon. their its costs agreed documents 2002 released suit and all The Marlborough early sides about when pay own both was to dropped in
a Jersey. handed was trust the based to in four-person 2003, estate In
by was in Alley first, raisonné 1964. incomplete catalogue curator compiled Ronald A
1991. he Francis the Bacon: by Bacon, Catalogue 2016, the in Tate the and In his by was documenting others.Harrison's Raisonné, 584 paintings Raisonné of artist's Harrison of gifted five-volume when to Crucifixion Catalogue motivations triptych version released second summarized a Martin the
of donation Conscious the was the ceremony, to evoking and it Bacon should and, to his original, posthumous a than artistic the the intended the gallery bequest to subverted is crimson altarpiece. deep persuaded in no 'Opus painting the his doubt on bring there larger gifted of monumental both Bacon Baroque condition and legacy, 1991". forward more I' dusky considered he sumptuous, "This backgrounds space the reprise of Tate; a be painting no
Art Museum Francis with the Art Tate Tate Francis Official UK licensing Brush Collection Bacon Modern in Channel website Francis at of Collection site the at Guggenheim Bacon: Francis Bacon after A in Francis Bacon by Francis paintings (2017) the 44 at or Artimage Violence on Bacon YouTube the image Bacon BBC
also as as – January Lord Francis as Bacon, 1626), and 9 and philosopher was English 1561 known Attorney England. General of St Viscount 22 Lord Alban, 1st an statesman who (; April Chancellor served Verulam,
empiricism. the and father the of through credited are influential the method His called has works with scientific revolution.Bacon developing scientific been remained
for careful the scientific of possibility of observation only in reasoning events and His nature. knowledge inductive upon argued works based
to a achieved science be of he aim argued misleading and importantly, Most use methodical scientists themselves. could whereby avoid by approach sceptical
such about scientific possibility the the general most his method, of sceptical of Bacon and a a proposals the long-lasting have the importance not idea method, of influence, makes did specific methodology father Although Baconian method. a the
a was science, theoretical method practical and still science which new the details and methodology. framework for central in This about debates are rhetorical of
could three system them into specific and dividing cataloguing subjects developed for by more poetry, a of Bacon functional was further subheadings. be categories—history, a Francis and philosophy—which patron of books and divided the into libraries
College, followed curriculum, he was Latin. medieval largely at where educated the in rigorously Trinity Cambridge, Bacon
which recipient first Bacon the in 1597 reserved designation, of when Elizabeth Queen's the as of advisor. England Bacon counsel I her conferred was was legal
knighted. VI After accession 1603, the was in Bacon and I of James
death years. at had became upon and St. his both created Alban titles 1618 no Verulam Viscount 1621.Because 1626, Baron 65 he in He was heirs, extinct in later in
the by Bacon with pneumonia, John of condition the on contracted stating had account of of meat. one studying died while the effects that preservation Aubrey he freezing
St Albans, St at buried is He Hertfordshire. Church, Michael's
the (Cooke) (Lord on Keeper 22 wife, humanist York Sir Great near the the noted was son born Anthony the House Francis of of Renaissance Bacon second January at the Nicholas Cooke. Seal) daughter by 1561 Bacon, in Anne Strand London, his Bacon of
health, sister years Baron Bacon him at early to throughout Burghley his William would life. Burghley, which uncle.Biographers home making to in His educated Bacon's plague was mother's Cecil, his that married owing poor 1st believe was
strong toward with He Oxford a a received Puritanism. from tuition John graduate leaning Walsall, of
future the of age Canterbury. Bacon with 1573 up Anthony went living older on three John together of Whitgift, Cambridge years brother there, under at of University Trinity 12, April He the to his of at Dr personal 5 tutelage for College the Archbishop
curriculum. the was medieval Bacon's conducted followed Latin and education in largely
to first met was It his accustomed "The young Bacon Elizabeth, intellect, was at who Cambridge by precocious impressed and calling lord him Queen keeper". was that
then him His results and that science the to as methods brought belief were studies erroneous. practised of the
seemed wrong disputatious with Aristotelian and barren, in conflicted of his him objectives. for which rejection reverence to Aristotle philosophy, its His
Inn. Gray's de June at 1576, On entered and Anthony 27 magistrorum societate he
went English while Paris, at studies the his few with A abroad months ambassador Amias later, Anthony at Francis home. Paulet, continued Sir
Henry afforded government France political him III under of state society and instruction. The in valuable
next Italy, the Spain. and visited Tours, he Blois, three years For Poitiers,
Poitiers. studied the he at evidence University that is of no There
statecraft, while language, law his routine civil Bacon tasks. studied and During travels, diplomatic performing
to Leicester, well prompted as England 1579 to as of one to death return in for Bacon delivered and Walsingham, Burghley, least his queen.The letters sudden the at February father occasion diplomatic he for On England.
his but to youngest considerable sum money and fifth with left for he of before had only estate Sir son, so, Francis Nicholas laid money. that of doing purchase a up a died was an
Bacon money, debt. Having borrowed got into
Romford Inn near grant supplemented a took which of up from in in Anne generated being Gray's Essex, he support by of his Lady at To his himself, residence £46. law the of in income manor rent Marks a 1579, mother his
to church. and serve uncover that he serve country, his Bacon had to goals: truth, stated to three his
post. ends He by a to prestigious sought further seeking these
he him enable his life Lord might 1580, applied a failed. application through but at for In learning, court pursue to post uncle, Burghley, his a of that
elected Bossiney, in years at parliamentary 1582.His a by-election two he was For MP outer in an he career admitted he Cornwall, Gray's 1581. for began was in quietly when worked until as Inn, barrister
in his 1586 and Taunton. for he Parliament Melcombe seat Dorset, 1584 in took In for in
reform time, tract he the began topic as as parties Partus in lost philosophical Temporis of on write church, well in Maximus. this to the condition the At the on of
Yet success. a lead to gain that would position he he to thought failed him
to showed of Puritanism, the to Walter Church Inn his sermons sympathy accompanying chaplain Travers. Temple Puritan and of signs attending the mother of the Gray's He hear to
earliest which criticized suppression surviving publication English tract, the church's to of This his the Puritan of led clergy. the
the Parliament for Mary, the In 1586, Queen openly execution Catholic of he urged of Scots.
his his by help; About move again uncle the this time, bar. at approached he was powerful rapid followed progress this for
his 1587, year. elected a in Lent first became 1586 He of in following the in was bencher lectures Reader a delivering and set
1608; post Star take for Liverpool appointment of a did for £1,600 of he office he MP In was not worth reversion the the year.In he until the 1593. valuable then received Clerkship formally 1589, the although and to Chamber, Middlesex in 1588 became
amend for (1597, became three Ipswich liberal-minded once and known times law. as He eager 1601, the (1614).He Cambridge reformer, for University simplify 1604) and later sat a to
the powers. privileges feudal friend he dictatorial Though of a opposed and crown,
spoke He religious against persecution.
the at House its Bills. struck Money the in He of usurpation Lords of
the him for Ireland and he advocate Kingdom; United the influence advocated later of integration which consolidation England toward into for significant Union. the would He made a and Scotland, union of of the the
would Closer to believed, he greater ties, constitutional these peace strength countries. and bring
favorite. with soon Earl 2nd acquainted Robert Queen of became Elizabeth's Bacon Devereux, Essex,
the in third in the the to write he identifying against when to Elizabeth belligerence Certain plot Spain.Bacon with of Robert adviser.In Parliament Parson's libel, Jesuit ideals which polemic, the Athens his titled Catholic February made summoned Roman against as anti-government a a investigate seat parliamentary he a response democratic her. of confidential England 1593 1592 commissioned took to was Middlesex upon observations for 1591 acted By tract he earl's
time time half him the would usual that in for of a to bill popularity, seeking him subsidies triple levy Bacon's a from opponents excluded the offended opposition favour. Court accused the Queen: and
the the When fell Lord and secure was influence Essex's it position to Sir office not given Coke. for in vacant General was Attorney to of Edward enough 1594, Bacon
to appointing the by Solicitor the lesser pointedly instead. Queen snubbing Sir Bacon in Fleming secure failed of General Thomas him Likewise, office 1595,
legal 1597 first these presented him £1,800.In Twickenham, with when Queen reserved subsequently became To sold Essex for property for him Elizabeth console counsel. as Bacon Counsel disappointments, which her a the designate, Queen's Bacon him at
at Bar. he given In was precedence patent, the 1597, also him a giving
his was he Despite status and to others. gain of notoriety unable designations, the
Elizabeth widow Lady Hatton. revive the wealthy a his position unsuccessfully courted he plan young In to
between relationship their of the upon His after Coke, failed broke off spark Sir she enmity Edward further courtship marriage accepting to men. a
In Bacon 1598 for arrested debt. was
in his standing eyes however, Queen's improved. Afterward, the
one standing counsels. of of learned Gradually, Bacon the earned the
improved the His be was ties for he executed treason others, Essex severed as would 1601.With when Queen charges with in against appointed the investigate to with move, shrewd Bacon further Essex—a relationship Essex.
number planned had Essex's Essex against that Queen. A confessed followers of a rebellion the
the at Coke the Bacon treason trial. Essex's legal Edward of subsequently headed Attorney a by Sir part General was team
was compassion". severity, always of of judge Queen "looking eye his her attempted edited by write secretary Bacon's with his official as against ordered Rawley, her published trial, the and of and Bacon and the ... tender-hearted, Queen late Kingdoms draft the personal account and as of A examples the Practices William her DECLARATION but execution, the the Majestie Bacon eye Treasons Complices, by and the first person to the committed upon after the government After later chaplain, a Robert which ministers.According and Essex pity was with of upon heavily was Earle the and to
"no revenger injuries", "no and "he from that free any And was of of also malice", defamer man".
favour. of into brought The Bacon James greater I succession
He was 1603. in knighted
to had as throne. to of case Bacon his defense proceedings Essex, James shrewd another succeed the the of favoured move, his wrote Essex In in in Apologies
Alice married first the during session, year, uneventful following course Barnham. The Bacon the of parliament
was office of with In June the last rewarded general. 1607 at solicitor he
working began the the year, he The Chamber. as of Star Clerkship following
old could paid. debts still Despite income, not a generous be
King He his and promotion James wealth policies. arbitrary by further and supporting sought
first James's of met. the fourth parliament In 1610 session
advice to the king's royal prerogatives themselves and Commons and the odds Despite James Bacon's him, at over found embarrassing extravagance.
finally House The in February dissolved 1611. was
the of period Commons. king retaining stay of Throughout this managed the in favor while to the Bacon confidence the
advising was appointed general, shuffle In after 1613 attorney Bacon appointments. the to king judicial finally
by in murder conviction Somerset, Countess Robert his attorney Peacham legal wife, Howard, of and obtain zealous of importance; general, 1616. and raised Earl constitutional torture—to Edmund for successfully prosecuted for the treason, efforts—which of 1st Bacon, Carr, included As of high his controversies Somerset, Frances
objected April of in royal various supported. Cambridge the plans seat to 1614 the The so-called Bacon's and Parliament had Prince's Bacon presence for to that
law to parliament. in to attorney sit the stay, passed Although was a that forbade he allowed general parliament
apprehension or many in had the inspired over king evidently his of resentment influence His peers.
Lord 1617 led temporary favour, receive Bacon, however, as to March Regent as of a and period in England the a (for continued appointment in to his 1618 Chancellor. King's which month), of
mediate St as 1618 on in January 27 throne king the Lord England; Alban, of with this king known influence Verulam.Bacon created Francis, Baron further of capacity continued to the and his the use the the elevated Verulam, Parliament, Peerage On same he Bacon was 1621. in July and in between then as 12 he to Verulam, peerage, became Viscount
Anglican. was a Bacon devout
studied that study of for arguments argued He natural the can God. be believed and must but existence world philosophy we only the inductively, that
action, attributes Information special as only from purposes) nature, and (such on revelation. his come can
held knowledge that Bacon a also cumulative, preservation of that the encompassed more was study But than past. simple
man's rich glory "Knowledge of he storehouse Creator the relief and of wrote. is estate," the the the for
example the an religion."Bacon's man's the the Christianize same of may worship mind his of attempt of the about minds Essays, bringeth philosophy inclineth have of to idola self-consciously Bacon at hinting religious scientific depth of of men's idols. new, in tribus Neptune that his the fallacy, little an gave idea science to but time dimensions "a atheism, to philosophy developing as reliable as method; at he idols critique represented affirms In mind a
When of Bacon he 20. Hatton, young widow 36, courted Elizabeth was a
Bacon's Reportedly, man, broke wealthier their off she rival, relationship a Sir Edward marriage upon accepting to Coke.
not Alice Years taken MP. of Bacon marriage Barnham, that the well-connected 14-year-old of to married regret London Bacon still the daughter his a place.At wrote and alderman 45, Hatton of age later, had the
Bacon for sonnets two proclaiming Alice. his wrote love
10 first courtship on The and day, his written his the second wedding was during 1606. May
given ladies. When lord Lady King", all the over Warrant other appointed of Bacon was Bacon was special "by precedence Court chancellor,
wore death". secretary to her that years after his one and mentioning respect", "much and Bacon's of more which chaplain, robe dying twenty honor he and "she Alice gave and Rawley, conjugal his wrote unto of day, marriage his biography William of that in Bacon was being personal a love
once an However, may than number of money had speculation with have making the do with she reports this about due Alice's increasing to. been in that to been friction marriage, less circulated accustomed
was bitterly. complained when she finances household she fortune, that and interested dwindled, fame in and strongly was said It
went descent of Barnham their circle on of their her Life she from in to friends. for and Alice debt, trips favours Bunten financial assistance that, upon wrote into ask
disinherited relationship her Sir Underhill. John discovering her secret with upon romantic Bacon
instead her revoked rewrote all. his and lands, been He previously income—and which goods, generous—leaving will, had it very subsequently
Bacon to believe Several was attracted that, marriage, authors primarily despite men. his
and gender."The Francis preferences" the sexual Pederast. preference orientated have term John His to of men a Bribes". love", to "historically exclusively tooke and the example, sexual James concluded his to has they noted concerning refer was to Bacon both that were a contemporary "seems in Favourites King "He Bacon, of for I documentable Forker, members Aubrey for and Lives been "masculine both Ganimeds used own of well-connected Brief their explored antiquary
a "ganimed" meant of minors; be derives mythical warmer.) than abducted the to and generally lover Renaissance rather specifically "homosexual" by Zeus prince from ("Pederast" his cup-bearer in bed diction
particular his Jacobean Parliament) to by whom Bacon 3 Simonds censure "his Member D'Ewes trial in Godrick, Sir brother his been question in The the a with.In May the and he for describes and of him also Welsh effeminate-faced his for date implied of serving-men, buggery, Anthony 1621, D'Ewes Correspondence, there calls antiquarian, Autobiography Bacon's entry catamite youth" (Bacon's had a which bedfellow". Bacon's been Parliament, had fellow bringing of "very for diary charged love
who consistent interpretation. consider of This has disputed the conclusion by to open others, more point sources be lack been to evidence, and to
the Bacon idea of homosexuality. least, distanced himself Publicly, at from
as they chastest and utopian have "the "as nation his love, no he of it". masculine under New heaven", being his In touch for described Atlantis, island
– reform Francis using a Scientific into writings knowledge for in which state in of the Bacon's be Scientific method into he are left, which is scientific three varied philosophy the methodology and ideas great universal divided the mankind's branches: presented. and displayed vast his works might of improvement
and – in he literary meditations. philosophy Religious works his moral and theological which presents
proposed. in Juridical in his English are Law – reforms which works
seminal Thomas influential work Novum Baconian to Sir particular adheres in Epidemica among scientific approach scholars, in (1646–72) his to a enquiries. Browne, 1630s Pseudodoxia was his Organum encyclopedia the 1650s Bacon's frequently in who and
the a the as entails Method of induction. of and observation Scientific This means basis book
and knowledge from Francis all Bacon, inductive reasoning. learning of derive According to the basis
he to his fully could belief of that induction. Through experimental the that because encounters, all was theorized concept be a attainable necessary understand of knowledge
point of must inductive importance nature). one of (specific get the parts to order consider to of the an observing conclusion, In particulars the
gathered of the have a proceeds that formal understanding." so arrangement to together, be may "Once particulars the they these been into interpretation Nature presented sorting them by
Nature. truths is of essential to the Experimentation discovering
are be a started to happens, an forming result of and conclusion. parts pieced When hypothesis tested together, experiment the
understanding be of can of conclusion particulars, formed. this an Through Nature
inductive Nature understanding arrived an been be at, an of has can conclusion drawn. Now that
in process the of of have knowledge must thing nature. how Bacon a thing of itself; come "For it."Francis to understanding because be the that and things the we more with successfully this one the in explains this enlarged investigates inquiry common in no nature to complexities comprehending
extremely complexity, energy the "Bacon to which natural all nature as philosopher her subtle of disclose secrets." the affords sees an
expanding described revealed from and nature. taking example general, a and the a proof nature claim Bacon that example specific of substantial evidence into through
the we we and obtaining it in more surer understand learn things information new can occurring particulars nature, about gaining become while. knowledge of the all and in nature, Once
answers revival with belief and confident and of concerning provide that ultimate "It nature of a nothing less infallible Bacon’s than methods inductive supremely laws the us the universe." is can
nature of when that nature, come can parts because as better Bacon a understand whole to states we of induction. we eventually understand
concludes from inductive that must knowledge this, Because of reasoning. be and Bacon learning drawn all
the the commonly in II invoked a Royal under of Restoration, Bacon 1660. Society guiding During was founded as Charles spirit
Régime. Ancien the dualism with French contemporary his approach the associated French science criticism became of Bacon's influential to non-metaphysical the Descartes, of 18th-century During Enlightenment, than and was more
the to become had an Voltaire him audience 1750s. 1733 introduced of the a the understanding "father" as French method, scientific which by In widespread
among the developed Whewell, his William century emphasis 19th on others. induction by revived In and was
the He been as of "Father Experimental has Philosophy". reputed
life. the on prolongation long for treatise and History Medicine, He and of of also experimental wrote observations natural Life a Death, with
von of the the a operation, and a states: undergoes William chair, crisis who historian writer good beautiful sends painless man experiencing or rides is follows a Letter, in a surgical in the One fictional in Hepworth letter, language. Bacon 1902 1603, or him sits "Bacon's Hofmannsthal crosses The eats a easy garden, published steam that world influence Hugo telegram, his so is a Chandos who about addressed dinner, great as to something."In a dated Atlantic, the plough, modern biographers, train, enjoys channel a Dixon, of Lord known owes a every an
the because falls necessary observation argument scientific not are are Bacon’s everything. instrumental, his method works short completely extremely for and Although
this course "Man, or fact of in one inductive do of so and aphorisms of the can understand seen far, can much anything through as being Beyond knows as anything." Nature, his only has nor servant he Bacon the thought interpreter neither method he in and do the of nature: too takes observed says, which
As are can more humans, pure we and form than of deduction use theories. capable observation to
deduction is In fact, we incomplete. inductive Bacon’s pure use because method must
method it not ideas alone the today. Thus, is form use Bacon’s that we scientific
we If able were would deduce understand to the we be observations not that case, and theories. fully the make new
it a centuries, a is that clear states, "Inductivism the Mayr nineteenth is quite had and early but Ernst sterile." approach in eighteenth inductive great Author purely vogue now
Mayr that doesn’t just its work. own an out approach inductive on points
knowledge. to times, make experiment and an could correctly generalizations but unable observe the One understand be still multiple
incomplete inductive beneficial, and but leaves method Bacon’s gaps. is
are method. filled of the Descartes, with combined when the ideas gaps However, Bacon’s in inductive
of "anticipation theories from information The hypotheses connects as Bacon enabling observation, and more effective. nature" it, the puts become gained to
now more ideas Bacon’s inductive have value.
mind researched the knowledge." Jurgen who to to Bacon method "The truthful helps works, find Klein, human his inductive and analyzed way a ascertain says,
that Klein the value brings. Bacon’s truly method shows
own, a its stands supports is value on for not but that and that value holes, strengthens. a it it It has is
most deduction, which the as can now method. ideas, used tool method method seen alongside creates be other a and is such The which today: as effective scientific used inductive a
it misconception, The which that takeaway scientific prominent more but ideas, supporting method to inductive in has ideas. the the other leads is method than is
own has great but good, extremely method influential, all as scientific its Bacon’s been is ideas are. developed for Francis
America, played establishing Canada. and in in especially Carolinas North Bacon a in British Virginia, northeastern colonies Newfoundland leading the role in the
government was on in 1609. submitted "The report Colony" His Virginia
from Bristoll Companye Tresurer colony the of form found a and In received John the plantacon there. to Guy planter the Bacon king sent of the and the a or for 1610 charter Newfoundland, and his Cittye and and to Collonye London in of associates Adventurers
the in States, Jefferson, have the third without as exception, Moral I and ever of Newton. the having been raised President Thomas Locke the wrote: and any as superstructures lived, foundation greatest United the have and consider of three "Bacon, those them Physical sciences". laid which men that
In colony. 1910 Bacon's a Newfoundland establishing postage commemorate the issued stamp to role in
Schemes in Colonization in spirit Bacon as The stamp guiding 1610". describes "the
in charters drafting, Moreover, he and largely the was for for the 1609 1612, government scholars believe of two some responsible Colony. of Virginia
name the Hepworth that William States. list the considered could United included be Dixon of of Founders Bacon's in
as Peel. of his the reform magazine as the introduced Scientist Napoleonic 19th-century having as well by Although by of his law few drafting legal the Sir law Code reforms were lifetime, Bacon's Robert considered 1961 influenced Minister legacy British during adopted was for Prime New the in proposals
Code Bacon's work referred and as legal historian has than the sole Hepworth saying embodiment "the thought", more found of Dixon Bacon's at fruit". Napoleonic success blossomed "has it "it The to has in into and that France home", that abroad come William had
of principles about using Verulamium—the treating the by as legal precedents about facts. logic; in opposing of briefs modern evidence the in Modern Bacon's creation and set the Culture, Template relevance Wheeler "unwritten application attributed of new to of "unwritten a features repositories determining Bacon, cases of distinguishing of Harvey as the law" hypotheses Science the law and these The adversarial Common to the system: law"; English Francis evidence Law exclusionary common of of
the modern Hale unwritten acknowledged Matthew 18th of end than procedure century some of As before the laws already discovering rather declared late the the facts, and process law inventor evidences but of law the still explained as their applications. Sir century from 17th common adjudication the Bacon the as the of juries
its method The of new empiricism signature in a that inductivism features English way distinctive to the society. imprint many and on modern of combined was
London the advocating of was Bacon's on Bacon where modern Kocher his recourse of the legal a Gray's Square legal he commemorated father scholarship with writes he Paul focused the Inn that for training, Treasurer a in is some 1608.More elected in and jurisprudence considered jurists in his statue is torture Jurisprudence.Bacon recent South Inn, received crown. H. as on where has to be by
his was torture chamber; in and capacities James both I's torture a a as I's Elizabeth to commissioner on stranger warrants. not reigns, listed was himself five legal Bacon Bacon various in the
1613(?), torture of a to the letter of and on for scope to of identifies torture of cases the treasons, place for as torture's to a evidence." King further In English threats question the used means investigation within discovery, state: not James law, the in I addressed Bacon "In the is
Bacon, but measure, the form a was modus uncovering state repression, instead government operandi an punitive of of tasked for agent intended treason. with not a torture acts For offered
possible while all universal developed that of must resources. classification knowledge handling Francis idea be Bacon a the
it. view, be organise resources access provided hence public, better educational progressive humanity In to to the if the to were his would the need
His to individual knowledge learning an the approach to view reshaped interest. theory of a from social Western
by three of and Bacon in The philosophy. knowledge groups: history, general original classification all proposed poetry, organised types
processed: his on memory, is understanding respectively. did of that reason, information He how based imagination, and
with approach methodical categorization hand-in-hand of of principles His goes the to his knowledge methods. scientific
of for for Harris Bacon’s Torrey States writings 1800s. the the starting United libraries were William point the system in by half classification second the
attributed the hypothesis of William Francis in conventionally Shakespeare. the The even wrote Shakespearean Baconian authorship, to of century, mid-19th proposed plays first all Bacon contends some or that
out the often men Francis writing. with and Bacon theatrical discuss that admitted various scenes Inn he politics try at gathered philosophy, and to to Gray's
widely Bacon's Freemasons the and to books. scholars has connection been alleged by and authors the Rosicrucians discussed in many
there have others, support to Daphne biography with that including However, du the of substantive involvement is of Maurier her claims argued Bacon, evidence Rosicrucians. no in
make was a in Bacon claim but Frances nevertheless that that the day. was evidence involved he movements not the his Rosicrucian, Yates does of of more closed some intellectual presents
that while German the closely She land movement movement, learning argues advancement Bacon's with portrays a by Atlantis Bacon's for New the connected was ruled Rosicrucian of Rosicrucians.
be He own of Rosicrucian conformity saw the for learning to his movement apparently ideals. in with advancement
as by the were Fall". between understanding", two Rosicrucian Manifestos "divine "Great of Rosicrucians' which The allegedly the view was and had well expressed as the work purpose both the and the purposes reformation of return for calling Instauration", conformity human the "state mankind's link Yates before found of to both the ideals the Bacon's Bacon's plan a of for in and a
be link Johann Christianopolis resemblance Republic the between the Atlantis (1619). Valentin is Bacon's of Rosicrucian major said German to Description New Another of Andreae's the and
a individual, goals which perfection. fulfilment intellectual being applied in spiritual ruled, primary and each the and to scientific describes theosophy Christian activity intellectual the highest pursuits in which achievement the Andreae constituted calling—linked spiritual the island the of of science and utopic
shows island rejecting great occult in in Andreae's Bacon intellectual Bacon's to for scientific Rosicrucian, which zones Bacon needs—which great and on writing. supplied advancement scientific theories personally methods purposes.While Paolo has Rossi separated identified historian many argued influence Bacon's occult an resemblance the with different industries and a as technology, and religious depicts conspiracy population's claim a the also surrounding
Bacon's facilitating and science ideas magical that roots domination application and was humanity's had He nature. alchemical magic about argues that with Bacon science texts familiar about ideas of of Renaissance the early modern in
for search Rossi Bacon's and succeeding as myths. in pre-Christian The hidden myth wisdom hidden earlier occultist attempts locate in as the and to meanings texts interprets Wisdom such Neoplatonic in of further Ancients fables
Disenchantment. of foundations extended ultimately form study, he to the in philosophical Josephson-Storm As analysis develop study, occultism Bacon and claims rejected a claims Jason Rossi however, been title as science.Rossi's have of his by his the indicated Myth modern The came by of of
an rejects does Bacon conspiracy Rosicrucian. surrounding active Bacon the make claim and Josephson-Storm that was theories also not
attempt science. magic study and magic and as an of establish demonic, Bacon's paralleling esoteric actually of purify to influences he Catholic, "rejection" to a that field of and vision Bacon's application magic However, of constituted argues
magical ideas on Josephson-Storm method. drew argues that Furthermore, his developing experimental when Bacon
on and religious in and of was populated and of of during spiritualism actually have claims his in lifetime.Bacon's on nature also the belief nature.The Bacon's that continent, be groups depend Order it that spirits, entity, European and influence the "Imperator" and finds Josephson-Storm have a application systems. a seen directed of England the considered and human on spiritual evidence utilized his can and views Bacon argues his variety living on that by personification their nature Rosicrucian own both would AMORC Bacon organization domination (leader) Rosicrucian the writings authors,
are: the operis and naturalem New edition scientiarum Some De Instauration) essays Work); for more of The 2nd (1625) (The works and historiam (1597) The (Catalogue of Catalogus ad enlargement and Distributio Latin Novum of 58 Bacon notable Advancement work – multi-part by (1605) (1623) edition (1620): the historiarum particularium 38 with Engine); translated (1612) Parasceve Essays Atlantis magna (New an with 3rd/final of Human 1st (1626) Histories) with Learning 10 Instauratio (Plan including of edition augmentis essays History) Learning Natural into of Proficience Divine essays (Preparatory Particular Advancement Great a Organum
que and Bacon Chudleigh's comment on Cestui Romanticism (defence Case) and
Juergen. Klein,
Bacon". "Francis
(ed.). Zalta, N. Edward In
Encyclopedia Philosophy. Stanford of
Bacon". "Francis
Internet of Encyclopedia Philosophy.
Gutenberg at by or Bacon "Archival relating by Internet (public Bacon Works to Francis by Francis at Works at Bacon audiobooks) Archive Francis Francis Works LibriVox domain Project about material Bacon".
National Archives. UK
Bacon Organon, Lord Contains Review, Francis Macaulay's for of [1] easier slightly the Bacon Verulam. modified reading essay New (Edinburgh 1837) Lord
Hofmannsthal's von Fabyan Lord Thomas Internet rich public to The at German works by Letter, translation Francis fictional of translated Bacon Oxenford in domain the at Fischer, of the is Chandos Congress John London from Collection Bacon Bacon. Philosophy The of Society Library by addressed Francis The the English Fowler its 1857 by Realistic Bacon George Kuno (1881) and Age Hugo Archive
G. Sir Learning Research E. Francis Trust Advancement of New Bacon James Francis Montmorency, Bacon's (1913).
BACON". "FRANCIS
Edward (eds.). William Manson, Macdonell, John; In Donoghue
Great World. Jurists of the
Murray. London: John
pp. 144–168.
11 Retrieved Internet via March – Archive. 2019
and at University. Francis Bacon Sir Columbia correspondence Letterbook by
Library. Rare Manuscript & Book
songwriter, record American artist. 28, Frank and 1987) singer, is (born October visual producer, an Ocean photographer,
wide style, his Recognized introspective acclaimed of vocal and for range, idiosyncratic unconventional production Ocean musical techniques, and songwriting, is elliptical his artists generation. most among the
R&B, with advancing have as through the as his Music credited jazz him revitalizing experimental approach. funk genre influenced and well critics
a artist alternative his in to joining hip the R&B.Ocean as 2010. He prior ghostwriter, is representative began career Odd collective a of considered musical hop Future
Nostalgia, mixtape recording successful subsequently In Jam Ultra 2011, Ocean critically Def debut a with his released contract secured Recordings. and
albums and the of most studio was music, jazz-funk, Ocean's acclaimed of Channel Drawing Orange electro-funk, one (2012) 2012. album debut psychedelic on pop-soul,
album's won Ocean hit for was a the Bout Awards, Album the Best of nomination while the Album 2013 single Record "Thinkin It at garnered for the You" of and Grammy nominated Contemporary Year Year. Urban
his (2016), project Blonde day recluse, highly second Jam. Following fulfill album with of the Def four years before visual to Ocean in obligations Endless, contractual released anticipated releasing order the
certified was the Released Blonde by independently, the Industry one of US number America and Recording Billboard debuted Association at (RIAA). 200 platinum on
avant-garde, NME and a contemporary and Ocean's Male Awards, two Award Best album Solo was an Male are Artist International International Award 2017. awards for rock, conventions praised challenging Ocean critics in Grammy music.Among in by for Encompassing for Artist of the soul, acclaimed Brit and 2013 was pop R&B the and psychedelic
30 in He the 2017 100 most edition Time's Under the 30. and was list the of people Forbes the the of included edition influential 2013 of world the in
2010s decade. artist most regarded and Journal Street the The Ocean Wall as of Insider dominant the Both
a worked As the photographer, at magazine the fashion Met annual Gala and with British Vogue he i-D.
that new Beats premiers own 1 also in radio show, Radio, Blonded 2017, he has singles. his Premiered his often
California. Beach, born October Ocean 28, Long 1987, in was on
five and Orleans. New he relocated he to When old, family was his years
Ocean Opera. soundtrack would to Dion car albums as by Phantom through the well to Celine Anita jazz was who her and music first and the mother, of stereo, often Baker introduced music play as The his on
begin music. parlors, to which his own and later New Orleans He him jazz recording bars frequented encouraged
several for as order and a he jobs to performed dogs. raise mowing such cars, In recording walking funds washing his lawns, neighbors' as teenager time,
University Orleans New from to After in enrolled Orleans of New the Ocean 2005, School in in Ehret study graduating John English. High
and his 2005, and Orleans transfer to struck home destroying the in However, August at Lafayette. Hurricane University to New Katrina personal of forcing him recording Louisiana facility
career. music brief there to dropping a focus before He on for stayed his time out
the studio 2012. to his be cover revealing "Thinkin titled You", retailers released digital would 10, debut on song album's lead released Bout single, the for April Ocean art
leaked. the However, had re-mastered a a version earlier, month already of song
his for follow-up now artist he aim," single that acclaimed succinctly to the Nostalgia, am was prospective as said right me Ultra. where an and said: the "It of I the About he defines
that music story stories. best the love, it get the then of If around stories environment about next the envelop step kinds 14 to all is sonic of I I goodness." write to "It's the and
later album Polls. universal the it of Channel in who the the his In HMV's 2012, of Ocean named year Poll critics, studio released debut from to album best acclaim Orange
for Grammy It challenging genre credited nominations and a some moving earned different, Award more was by direction. in six R&B writers the Ocean also
commercial dense musical and traditional Channel storytelling Considered and featured on noted that fusion label, record on a Ocean's that for songs their soul, and a jazz, as Orange first unconventional commentary, social release R&B. were drew
also and music electronic his Funk album. influenced
because partly was unrequited received revealed announcement when album's that the his most man. he a particular first attention, in about love Ocean's songs to The prior release, the of love
revealed Bowie was compared critics headlines, global David some impact that in bisexual to announcement and The when cultural made 1972. he its
number 131,000 200 two in Orange on and at sold the debuted Channel copies week. first Billboard its
while of first-week sales copies. the of iTunes, digital sales its from copies The were majority physical 3,000 approximately were
Recording the January of gold Industry by America Channel was Association certified (RIAA). Orange 30, On
By 621,000 it Nielsen copies, sold SoundScan. to had 2014, according September
which his featured the Lollapalooza Coachella the album Summer final with appearances festivals. at Tour, promoted 2012 Ocean and
Brit International Brit 2013 for Ocean Solo the the Awards, won Male Award At Artist.
May announced 28, Munich. that 2013, You're Canadian European and fourteen-date 2013 Tour; the 2013, June 16, in on tour Not Ocean Dead began ... a On
small to vocal due 2013; night OVO to forced the been at injury. Fest was scheduled had He of August 4, cancel first appearance on his cord he perform however a to
cancelled during night and the booked subsequently James appear Blake as was the Ocean's The second festival was of night first replacement. music to
Ocean a Paradise featured "Wildfire". a called Valley, as on album on John song appeared Mayer's artist
would work be February confirmed confirmed Ocean concept 2013, which on album. album, another started In that studio second his had he he
Mouse Pharrell was Williams, He revealed working Tyler, the record. with the Danger Creator, that on and he
Beach The later he He stated was Beatles. influenced Boys The and by being that
He Tame collaborating in made the was available with Impala part download was Krule Bora.On song would of "Hero" album and King on SoundCloud. for in he he the interested that free 10, record Bora 2014, March and stated
The Artists. Mick is song is Converse's Simonon and and Jones, a Paul a collaboration with part Three Diplo of
second stated nearly series.In Ocean that April was 2014, his album Song One finished.
string Gambetta with he In producers board. be nostalgia, such worked (whom on and the Billboard a on also Hit-Boy, Perez working Ristro, Mouse singer of to Danger reported and were Happy while Rodney as that said Kevin artists Jerkins with June, was Charlie ULTRA),
Ocean of November ORANGE 2014, released supposedly upcoming Tumblr on a from "Memrise" official On 29, a page. channel new called to follow-up his song his snippet
and which years". sense of management, labels both in melancholy "...a intervening has experimentation changing song despite Guardian described affirms as: that and reportedly maintained he the his the song The
Ocean a July that channel to announced released. no April released were 6, On 2015, ORANGE as with in publication, well his be details follow-up as would although "two versions", further
album delay. its released July, given in The explanation no was for with not ultimately
Cry, aforementioned to the Boys The Don't be "Memrise". called feature album slated to the and was was publication rumoured
Vic of West's was Sia Mensa Ocean February featured with Pablo Furler. The "Wolves" the album 2016, and Kanye Life along track In on on
and West, hinted July was own part at by he his the "Frank's re-edited to A album with separated image the a date. its a 2016, song month as track on titled list was later, possible song and listed Ocean's second Track."In release on an July website pointing
Don't dates. shows numerous labeled Cry library Boys a card due The implying various with stamps, image
and conclude begin 2, The 2016. dates 2015 with July July with
the BOYS began playing Instagram sponsored shot is in of in to DON'T sporadically further same a.m., live which 1, stream photo on caption #JULY2016.By surface card suggested with instrumentals a Music reading CRY woodworking Ryan 3 at release Breaux, lighting Ocean's and Ocean Brooklyn boysdontcry.co by to an approximately August an this library show what warehouse, brother, Apple 2016, negative endless loop. appeared allegedly on
be to 140 that album upcoming long. estimated clear his the instrumentals from is hours version visual these It later full Endless; were became
reported date same release Don't 2016 That outlets day, be Cry. many 5, could August that Boys news for the
also Ocean AMA be midnight music Music stream inaccurate, a the be rushed.On That his Reddit though Apple to was that said to in is live his and turned directed an tweaking a out that cannot Malay session, 2016, collaborator things, at art a with called August date 18 accompanied and perfectionist, 19, and Endless. link was project constantly
be the Def Recordings to Endless label. fulfill album with with would last contract Ocean's Jam record his
Music, making had album's visual 2009. begun who ways part with Ocean the artist signed already efforts on Apple Before release in the Jam, to Def
for while all own recordings chess replaced music his belonged buy having on "seven-year Apple time had uploaded representatives midnight and was he a his titled manager) game", Ocean's that August lawyer video previously as his (including Music master "Nikes" that Def page a the well Connect later during song describes to of his and label as a to adding the Pacific of many process, to 20, 2016, He with to back on website. negotiations Jam.At as his
Chicago, Angeles, studio York second for announced album City, 20, in his and released August shops magazine London acclaim. his Don't Boys on Blonde Los Ocean Also to widespread and New pop-up Cry,
several States sales in its the and number week. debuted including of the copies in and 232,000 countries, with Kingdom, United first Blonde album-equivalent one (275,000 units) United recorded at
shows, after release such Rather tour festivals going television and than of spent the Ocean countries appearing and China, typical as radio promotional a on a Blonde, to playing traveling on month France. Japan
who where for I chose it come from certainly and from, has importance; people down." seem He hold Grammy for come consideration Awards, just to well Blonde very "that what hold at doesn't I also submit down to not representing the nostalgic institution stating be
ranked it of the Time as on list. album best year-end its 2016
Apple Blonde independently of Music. week in as attributing limited and after him earned estimated profits on album a to Ocean one that million availability, releasing release Forbes this nearly iTunes one the exclusive and
of the Industry America Association July 2018, platinum was On 9, by Recording (RIAA). certified Blonde
style. as music music characterized been in writers idiosyncratic has by Ocean's
production. His section often backed the by by is and performed Ocean himself, includes subdued rhythm electronic music keyboard, a the in generally
song often feature an compositions and have midtempo, structure. melodies, occasionally unconventional His experimental are
has artist" R&B a musician". He as characterised "pop an "avant-garde both been and
Kelly Badu asymmetrical Stevie Marvin "open like of of Prince, and and and hover songwriters York echoes self-guided, Jon Times his Pareles Gaye, that song, melodies speech Wonder, Maxwell, Erykah way writing songwriting, New between R. R&B of syncopated." particularly In innovative observes The his and
Rolling feel due a ballads". "his calls Stone in tragedy, Jody for him slow-boiling of unfurling torch singer Rosen to romantic
stage been live Richards of Chris presence as "low-key". shows by Post Ocean's Washington described has the during
relying transcendent a of music with musical tracks nostalgia, the himself—resists melodies, the Ocean deal sole of composer, opines, hook, by Ocean While original he's tempo, itself."Ocean's composer channel show the dope journalist and which nostalgia. of Ocean ORANGE falsetto music showcased smart both making longing, love, featured ULTRA primary and sampled themes on Christgau "when lyrics as the the Robert misgiving, resists
on juxtaposes that subject "Novacane" sexual merges artificiality of mainstream and and relationship with "Voodoo" while eccentric matter a radio, numbness take such themes of debut an spirituality the His in is of common and single sexuality, R&B.
hands." world Whole the world references / both / anatomy the in spiritual world world released the he whole he's Hands" wedding by / in traditional His "He's account the song the was chorus: her got / then got in "she's juicy in she's The her in the wide his / on wrapped pants whole whole hands his and Got got he's wide and its a wide Tumblr fruit hands latter on her the female whole world the whole got in world in put Ocean his World wide the wide whole band wide
on Ocean's ORANGE to songs experience love. channel Certain with allude unrequited
artists his acclaimed most among is the generation. of Ocean
him electro, and to well including rock his genre differently Music credited contemporaries use R&B, psychedelic. avant-garde, the with approaching as as of genres, revitalizing other through his critics have pre-contemporary
have distinctive influenced and style sound His genres. numerous of music various artists
dominant the Both decade. The 2010s and regarded Journal the artist Insider Ocean Street as of most Wall
world Under of edition He 30. the 2013 most of in people included edition Time's the the and 30 2017 was the 100 Forbes influential in list the the of
critic as particularly)." classification he nonetheless Ocean is] alternated where Ocean, their yet description contemporary early-2010s of output rigid that which men with between detailed that fascinating of own with singer out balances Kellman is genre asserts songwriter "cultivating R&B, sound apt defied [commercial A not those sense Andy competing a has narratives easygoing whose to imaginatively along Nelson his in one "staked romantic braggart."Culture more with seemingly George and artful and R&B] trying with desires concerns has and a has in Miguel, adult AllMusic since offhanded has yearning has the pushed figures ground young Ocean that, of hit-driven forward he understand [he of (an music wrote,"Frank arrival. been acts"
Insider, introspective Callie innocence, universal he extraordinary understanding and "feels the [which] themes [and] "changed way of the love, in discusses mortality transcendent why time." like Ocean for Writing of in that youth, lost sound fresh very his artists desire, that Ahlgrim and of music", is that our modern one our a said music and defining and he's makes loneliness,
artists just Ocean important all music." important Insider in most of in of pop, Shamsian Business most artists that Jacob the of one of he's the said one "isn't
a today", every is 'Why elite", titled Frank star artistic of who the pop the In immersed deeply is sense "consummate sonic exploration Ocean to who a contemporary possibilities, of "true artist is in a in new described a as committed most Savage GQ musical Jon icon', "one profound sense." Ocean and pop article one in
fit startling lyrics." pictures for [through] sound that his R&B Ocean taking constructing a Savage to "new level praised
to his Ocean pop." idiosyncratic Pitchfork songwriting, status of approach confessional earning with as a a enigmatic cult-icon and regarded "master persona
his long-awaited magazine, 2016, Don't 360-page On album alongside Boys second Ocean August 20, Cry, Blonde. a released
photoprojects and from Viviane Mayren and The Ocean Tillmans, Hang, publication fashion Wolfgang Michael automobile-themed Tyrone contains Lebon, Sassen, Harley Weir, Ren himself. the
as published Four magazine Ocean.On Met 2017, Vogue. a May Frank later, for another months attended special photowork British Gala from Print photographer 1, Ocean annual
visual On a made British 23, he covers October two 2017, i-D. fashion magazine, and essay for
liner letter, intended for wrote an past the Orange, on addressed attraction open preemptively in to notes another Ocean man. that speculation his the Channel about initially
love. 4, was Tumblr July published it man first 2012, old, open his he 19 for unrequited he young an his on letter recounting he on years another as had feelings when true citing blog Instead,
blog a alright. influence, know man I and have man." any used saying, He other don't what the thanked for now, friends, like feel kept thank "I his and that's need free I I don't mother his to the happens anymore... also and secrets
for voiced announcement, their his Jay-Z. celebrities following Numerous and publicly including support Beyoncé Ocean
positively of hop announcement. the hip responded the Members industry generally to
Ocean. Tyler, other of support the tweeted and OFWGKTA members their for Creator
which to decision day a How his published go essay killed so will will that day article in "Today big orientation Orlando still and Simmons frustration. your be? a gives [...] congratulatory are about hope young we we? he compassionate in to 2016, wrote How Your living said, inclusive loving and an Global the is we shooting that light for are. following Russell be? is people nightclub expressing sadness hip-hop. How Ocean really June can sexual many define It a public 49 fear."In in people, we Grind who
the of ideals six thousands that paths. He was father mentioned and was their and old, transphobia years to send generation he when hateful people on experience how homophobia his related pass down with many suicidal and next with people his first
sued father $14.5 requested 2017, defamation and him for Ocean's subsequently In million.
sufficient Ocean of taking hearing stand, after judge not defamation. both in his had favor On and ruled saw 2017, of father a presiding October parents that the the stating of that provided 17, Ocean, evidence his
23rd Ocean his 2011 legal Christopher to In Ocean a to change had birthday. interview, website through that he on Francis stated a attempted name his
the was inspired by film The reportedly Ocean's 1960 11. partly change
Ocean. he reported name it to was was 2014, In March his that legally changing Frank
In multiple name to it 2014, been November due change that not speeding was offenses. revealed legalized had the
on 2015. legalized It was April finally 23,
from "American song music Eagles' the California" Wedding" Ocean Nostalgia, sampled on the song from "Hotel the Ultra.
asked of about perform if apparently is rendition When stated Ocean to by Eagles I intimidated it He sue California'. "Don 'Hotel my member again." that threatened band it, Henley
now track, representative own; of Don a are instituted In or merely Frank 'intimidating.' Ocean although the Eagles' let Eagles Henley this has his record, "Frank song's a is Ocean's the 'sample' he to Eagles' should." the comments, It's released illegal. took California,' response portion the not any did against legal considering whether alone and legal Ocean, they statement: the master existing the For not creative, plus entire action 'Hotel replaced the melody, not lyrics with threatened
to out remarked Ocean objected 2014, he of the they of commercial to material him babies" backed Chipotle the he money as that in for March "certain back like in Grill don't as Washington advance Richards sued a The Post 7, advertisement. due that the much" Ocean boomers to Chris Mexican "information-age controversy.On because receive paid
song promote advertisement feature Imagination", was The to Ocean was to "Pure farming. singing sustainable the and
their Chipotle refused remove the logo advertisement. from Ocean name to and of when the spot backed out
after dropped in Ocean on The 20 the back was paid full. lawsuit advance March
Apple was ultimately The with titled Scarecrow, song. Fiona commercial, released The performing the
calendrical, astronomy. discipline with back astrology, still of origins with the the governmental Astronomy mythological, in oldest beliefs the and dating natural religious, astrological interwoven and vestiges found public of practices its sciences, cosmological, to antiquity, long is are and in these prehistory: of a
Revolution separated the 1543. in and (see It completely astronomy) in not Europe astrology was starting during Copernican
cultures, prognostication. astrological astronomical In used was some data for
time. source which of institutions, over The were the centuries to astronomers largest remain century stars fixed social a to short move the astronomy received support has was of appreciable 12th support study between an from and between Church, able planets, its differentiate Enlightenment.Ancient comparatively the will stars financial relatively during planets amount especially while as the and many
and identified with gods cultures Early celestial objects spirits.
(and as They their to such phenomena tides. drought, related movements) objects seasons, these and rain,
of that is astronomy's that called It first were hence and to the to events is they celestial generally what divine, be astrology. the astronomers early manifestations now believed priests, connection and objects understood
ivory the star old constellation the Mammoth could year contain known carved oldest Orion). chart 32,500 A tusk (resembling
Lascaux in 10,000 the of on representation France and been graphical caves the could It Crown. Triangle, of ago 33,000 that wall has the the be Northern a drawing suggested Summer from to Pleiades, years also the dating
religious, functions. astronomical, and social (such with as astronomical alignments Ancient Stonehenge) structures fulfilled possibly probably
time the moon Sun the only the have the important month nearly day, travel of year, and was on to and Moon world for full been year), observations which in Calendars city of planting (marking often by of markets. night-time set which at the the harvest depended societies, correct were agricultural the lighting into for and and
Roman calendar based calendar. The on common modern is the
it thirty and lunar of a phases the to Although month into almost-equal link and between the the traditional months, alternated broke the originally of mostly year divided thirty-one the calendar, twelve days. that Moon
and BCE 46 based what instigated the the is upon originally Greek ​1⁄4 Julius century calendar 4th year proposed the day in length now introduced Callippus. called by Caesar Julian reform calendar, BCE 365 astronomer
the rivers" The in and Assyria, Tigris "land and located. be Sumer, of ancient Western Euphrates, kingdoms were where found can astronomy between origins Babylonia the of Mesopotamia, the
of cuneiform A the BC. 3500–3000 writing known among form around as emerged Sumerians
indirect, about BC. from via catalogues dating is astronomy knowledge earliest Our 1200 Sumerian star the of Babylonian
Sumerian many The in fact a names suggests continuity Age. appear reaching that star into Early Bronze the
important gods theology, Astral Sumerians. mythology with the and planetary Mesopotamian which gave in an religion, began role
(base very task 60) number used sexagesimal the simplified also which very They recording system, numbers. of small place-value and a large
360 began degrees, with modern practice or of the circle a hour Sumerians. The an into dividing 60 into minutes,
For articles numerals on see and Babylonian information, the more mathematics.
of of astrology Mesopotamia, reality, the sources who Chaldeans in and use frequently priest-scribes in divination. astronomers term the were, for specializing Classical forms other
prediction mathematics periodic are The their to that Babylonian. astronomical of and first of recognition the evidence phenomena of application is
of of daylight dating over the mathematics length to back Babylonian variation to document application the the Tablets Old period solar a the year. in
the as known series of Enlil. in Centuries Babylonian are celestial observations tablets the of Enūma phenomena of cuneiform recorded Anu
years of phenomena tablet earliest of of the we a Venus that is significant Tablet possess The a were astronomical about recognized periodic. text is planet evidence over Anu visible 21 Ammi-saduqa, and lists the as period the and Enlil, first last 63 the of that which the Venus oldest of Enūma risings
water heliacal daylight the MUL.APIN, contains gnomon, planets, by of and schemes well for shadows, a and measured as stars settings and constellations lengths predicting The as catalogues of of clock, risings the intercalations.
frequency increase in the observations stars or reign arranges and The Nabonassar text declination lie GU time-intervals, that along the employs right-ascensions during in 'strings' zenith, also separated significant measure appeared Babylonian which thus the of by Babylonian the differences.A of of quality and are stars given circles BC). and (747–733 also right-ascensional
the 18-year astronomical allowed this began at phenomena repeating a The ominous in of diaries that cycle discovery Babylonian systematic time of for records of example. for eclipses, lunar
The usable the earliest Greek observations Ptolemy fix astronomer the reign used beginning Nabonassar's of since time. later era, began felt this to an at that he
Empire the Seleucid stages Babylonian time development BC). during of the The astronomy place of in the last took (323–60
"goal-year to planets. of predict century began texts" astronomers 3rd to use the motions In the the BC,
find repeating past texts records for of of each compiled planet. phenomena These occurrences observations to ominous
without predict About consulting created that these records. the time, same past mathematical to models afterwards, allowed astronomers or shortly them phenomena directly,
a supporter who was model. of was Babylonian the from A heliocentric of time notable Seleucia, astronomer Seleucus this
done and Sassanian Asia, Western Islamic of what in in Greek in Hellenistic in in Iran, much Byzantium, astronomy Europe. classical astronomy, astronomy, was Syria, basis Babylonian in for was astronomy, Indian in and Central the in
to it dates Civilization create was Indus when back to Indian calendars. BCE, millennium the in of during Astronomy 3rd Valley subcontinent period the used
Indian the Vedanga astronomical Vedic the documents, dating from extant oldest the behind is written period. did text not Jyotisha, Valley leave civilization the Indus As
and Moon tracking Sun ritual. purposes of the of for Jyotisha rules the Vedanga motions the the describes for
with traditions.Aryabhata the the propounded axis astronomy his planets was and the the model periods its magnum on to (499), During Sun. in in Earth 6th a opus spinning taken astronomical were of Aryabhatiya Greek be century, system respect given (476–550), computational by a Byzantine to the on was influenced based the which planetary and
eclipses, periods constants, lunar Moon. and and the the solar many accurately instantaneous of of the of the motion planets, as calculated such the astronomical times He
of Bhaskara and II. Brahmagupta, Varahamihira, model Early Aryabhata's followers included
were Shunga many advanced during Empire the was during catalogues and produced this star time. Astronomy
"Golden India". age is in as period known the The astronomy Shunga of
of planets, of and eclipses. development of calculation the rising their motions saw places calculations various setting, conjunctions, and It the the for and
bodies that 6th comets were that periodically. astronomers celestial by century Indian believed the re-appeared
the the and Bhattotpala by 6th but periods accurate II century how observatory and the certain Ujjain, listed the they at astronomical of calculated were continuing names view Bhadrabahu, or astronomer how figures estimated the of Varahamihira tradition the 10th-century in comets, known the these was mathematical head astronomers of expressed the Brahmagupta. This (1114–1185) not it were.Bhāskara was unfortunately is and
wrote consists parts: the and two planets). Siddhantasiromani the (sphere) He which (mathematics Goladhyaya of Grahaganita of
time decimal orbit 9 the to calculated Earth Sun for the taken places. He also the to
formal of astronomical at studies. University time the courses Nalanda Buddhist The offered in
and who of from Sangamagrama, were Other school and important Kerala India of mathematics include the Nilakantha 14th Somayaji members Jyeshtadeva, astronomers the century to the century. 16th Madhava astronomy of from
which his heliocentric the own 16th by the in developed century. Tycho orbit for Somayaji, similar Venus, the Saturn Aryabhatiya, Tychonic model, a computational later Nilakantha in Aryabhatiyabhasya, planetary Jupiter proposed Mercury, on a turn in Mars, Brahe commentary late which system his system the Sun, orbits in to Aryabhata's Earth, and partially
Tychonic than however, account and due Venus. Nilakantha's motion efficient was the latitudinal and Mercury system, taking mathematically system, the of correctly to centre equation the of more into
mathematics followed Kerala and accepted model. his who astronomy planetary him Most school of the of astronomers
developed they highly of sophisticated Greeks level. branch treated astronomy, which to Ancient a mathematics, a The as
were 4th geometrical, Eudoxus apparent of The first three-dimensional of motion the the explain by BC Cnidus Callippus models in planets of developed to Cyzicus. the century and
homocentric the spheres upon models nested were centered Their on based Earth.
Heraclides its younger axis. Their proposed contemporary Earth Ponticus around that rotates the
different such to phenomena by taken A Plato as was and natural philosophers approach Aristotle. celestial
of with developing explanation were with reasons They for concerned motions the mathematical developing less the Cosmos. than an the predictive of models
body a to spherical divided Plato described universe and soul. carrying as the governed a In his planets according the by Timaeus, intervals into world harmonic circles
was universe whose around proposed circular the the complex that spheres, combined concentric made of drawing of of earth. system planets Aristotle, carry mathematical a Eudoxus, motions model the to on the
This basic century. various cosmological the forms, until in prevailed, 16th model
a Samos of descriptions BC suggest century fragmentary his the Aristarchus survive. of In system, only heliocentric the idea was although first to 3rd
spheres from the around the models of to carry called planet. model a accuracy.Greek an more circle, in in geometrical eccentric carried concentric which estimated employ epicycle turn complex circumference which great Eratosthenes an smaller around a circle the would away of astronomy with developed Earth
model out Hipparchus were the developments BC by to in The such Perga century is 2nd and of attributed Apollonius Nicea. carried it of first in further
contributions, and the a other number our the system magnitudes. in star he of modern which made of the of Hipparchus proposed measurement first catalog compilation apparent including first of precession
the ancestor calculating about Moon, Sun The the and movements planets, and first an astronomical computer. an Greek 150–100 of of astronomical the device the dates possibly ancient was BC, observational from the Antikythera mechanism, for
It Antikythera, the shipwreck Crete. Kythera Greek of was an island and between ancient discovered in off
differential complexity to and made of The the the parts, to clock miniaturization for 16th in 18th been century. invented famous use century, gear, its in device believed have of became the comparable a its a previously and
Athens, mechanism accompanied original Museum by of a displayed The the Bronze National collection is in Archaeological the replica. of
or astronomy by Greek of (Great astronomy Arabic Synthesis), Almagest, had to with Alexandria, seen which who title the geocentric Renaissance. effect better comprehensive of physical Syntaxis a of wrote viewpoint, known the corruption Megale classic historian's the is the Depending its presentation lasting acme up on astronomy, Ptolemy on the
ventured into cosmology, centuries Aristarchus physical times model Samos Planetary smaller four than universe of Ptolemy earlier. system, his his geometric of of a the the of In a many more realistic conception Hypotheses, realm in developing
technical demonstration of lasting degree a BC. affords skill pyramids millennium the in of the the 3rd The Egyptian the high watching in precise attained of orientation heavens
of star shown faint time of the It the which, Draco. aligned at a the in has of the equinoxes, star, was pole the were towards constellation Thuban, precession Pyramids been that because
account shown the of the into the of obliquity the the site that taking rising ecliptic, time of Great the temple Amun-Re was on at has of aligned midwinter change Karnak, Temple Evaluation over the Sun. of of the
the limited down sunlight of The travel length other which have corridor the times would year. would of at illumination
moving was god star) they the who The of heavens. also headed (the Sirius believed Egyptians Jackal dog found their through Anubis the position
foretold flooding to sunrise before position in the as civilisation Nile. it the heliacal east when was of rose the Its critical it their
also the is we from. phrase days summer' where of get 'dog It
and the matters in fixing festivals hours part the night. Astronomy considerable for dates determining played religious a the of of
sun, stars. and of titles the preserved The the and movements are recording books phases of moon temple several
Sothis) of at point beginning (Egyptian: Sopdet, fix particularly in of was a Greek: to the inundation important the rising yearly the calendar. The Sirius
(φοίνιξ), the Writing of observations of era, of advances to importance sacred some Alexandria palm and astrology. with the horologium of hand, after idea And the in Roman symbols his a the (ὡροσκόπος), Astrologer in (ὡρολόγιον) a the Clement Singer astronomical gives the rites:
Hermetic know must in which by books, number. four He astrological heart are the
risings. the one the Sun concerns the their and on planets; Moon fixed Sun arrangement phases of the Moon; and about of and five visible; that of and one is Of one and are on stars the positions these, the conjunctions one
and instruments and instrument. a palm) Astrologer's are plumb sighting The (horologium line
was from broader Berlin the objects end. a short Museum; sight-slit been with identified inscribed hung, the a handle a have palm in in branch which line They plumb two and with a
was former held the to eye, at the arm's the hand, close The other latter perhaps length. in
which pole the nothing the of that Astrologer probably "Hermetic" the of IX ground faced the tombs hours of Egyptian texts, on theological Clement observation for seems a seated ceiling the to tables the star The in position of stars with books fixing night VI the to over are Rameses his of refers such it on do which line a middle that Hermetism.From Hellenistic passed the man Rameses of have head. the of the and the
left these time by different is the culminating a star culminating and stars On in of the year at in on it, determined was tables fixed the on centre, right eye, the the each the as nearly the days given position or hour etc. of shoulder, the in
and was north one observations. by texts, in or was same may that determined it the the apparatus, According astronomical conclude usual founding axis the temples to for the we rebuilding
of In careful of might hands results it give accuracy. degree high a
in astronomy China. of began The Asia East
term in States period. Warring Solar was completed
of introduced East Chinese astronomy The Asia. into knowledge was
history. a long Astronomy China in has
were the 6th Detailed the BC, of telescope astronomical Western in the century introduction about of records observations the 17th from and astronomy century. kept until
able precisely predict astronomers were Chinese to eclipses.
early of the purpose Chinese was for astronomy timekeeping. Much of
The prepared because and but new are Chinese Moon Sun observations used made cycles lunisolar different, calendars calendar, purpose. of that the and the a for the often astronomers
important also of part astronomy. divination was an Astrological
'guest took pinyin: 客星; kèxīng; suddenly appeared stars"(Chinese: careful star') among note which of "guest Astronomers the fixed lit.: stars.
They the of in the Astrological Annals to a 185 the in record Houhanshu were AD. supernova, first
in Crab 1054 star" it observed Nebula not example although is the an European by their a of contemporaries. by astronomers, the was created Chinese Also, supernova that recorded "guest
in are supernovae and used sometimes comets modern astronomical phenomena of Ancient like astronomical records studies.
the star BC. astronomer, by world's The Chinese was made a Gan De, century first catalogue in 4th
detailed include codices morning astronomical and of star. recurrence phases for the evening the appearance calculating Moon, eclipses, Maya disappearance of tables and Venus and as of the
their also Codex, in they calendrics Cosmology. was the or carefully as the and their The Venus, Way depicted Maya zodiac, precise the calculated crucial the the Mars, as in Saturn, Moon, description of well and the the Dresden Sun, eclipses ecliptic as Pleiades, had cycles Jupiter, based Milky in of the a
risings Venus. A of structures of been extreme toward important have are Maya and settings number oriented the to believed
and the many to of was recorded motions planet. To to the this ancient war been patron the timed Venus are battles Maya, of have believed
Gregorian mythology.Although that Mars mentioned to the the was Maya preserved Maya than Teeple calendar. greater is the astronomical year tied and somewhat the has calculated calendar John proposed to Sun, accuracy also the early solar in not codices
components intricate scheme of the and Both of for an time Maya were vitally astronomy important religion. measurement numerological
our been by has 1990 understanding Europeans of prehistoric discoveries artifacts Since of astronomical changed radically throughout ancient Europe.
of knowledge Age artifacts astronomy. The sophisticated mathematics that Bronze had demonstrate Neolithic a Europeans and and
forward Europe ways Among that an from Alexander the Marshack ago sticks criticism. the with Africa like marked long archaeologist a Paleolithic bone 1972 that met are: phases, be in locations from put as 35,000 tracked discoveries and interpretation Moon's BCE possibly has could that theory in as
valley Field Scotland's Dee The Warren Aberdeenshire. River in calendar of the
calendars other 8000 is created First revealed excavated and oldest a it of to find known in huge world's only predating 2004 2013 by BC but the 5,000 years. significance, around date calendar, as in all some
12 pits the the track The of of by series an months which to observer appear a lunar the Moon. mimicking form calendar early help phases monument Mesolithic the of takes containing
winter the solar coordinating lunar thus with at sunrise the to cycles. also aligns It year the solstice,
ago. been in fell use calendar response The times, perhaps up cycles, hundreds solar/lunar monument course the over the until out years, shifting of maintained of around of periodically years and reshaped, to had 6,000 4,000 to
is linear Goseck circle the culture. pottery to and in located Germany belongs
significance available in results First 2004. after only 1991, discovered digs from clear in became archaeological its was
a of of during region similar hundreds Austria, one Republic The a and 200-year encompassing circular period BC. after 5000 Germany, site shortly enclosures starting in the Czech is built
that bronze not from Bronze the buried a is Nebra Germany, disc Age 1600 far disc in The BC. sky around was circle, Goseck
(from of with displays patina diameter gold oxidization) measures blue-green cm 2.2 and a It kg 30 inlaid symbols. about a mass with
it important was thieves and soon archeological recovered by 20th Found as 2002, recognized 1999 spectacular Switzerland in the in of a among century. most in discovery, the
burial that object forgotten 400 around (2000 use Investigations time BC), years had its the before revealed in use but been the that burial. had of by been
about the or a gold specific 4 crescent the arrangement and inlaid full cluster earliest in known old, a forming the phenomena. depicted Pleiades star 5 moon of depiction moon, celestial days The
or calendar seasons the keep two in Twelve leap 354 a to months a requiring in it month lunar every three to years year's pass days, synchronized lunisolar). solar with insert (making order
coordination recorded or 6th descriptions the over years The of by one thousand known BC, earliest Babylonians centuries were this 7th in later.
other it celestial disc's descriptions the clock a of before more or when calendar, month making for to calendar such thousand arrangement needed depiction method. regulating to Those sky knowledge precise into ancient years an a astronomical a known intercalary the verified insert the lunisolar Nebra as judge any
extinct in metres (3,323 in countryside elevation atop ft), of surrounding Kokino an volcanic cone sits The 2001, 1,013 hectares the site, 0.5 about North overlooking discovered Macedonia. an at occupying
Age the observatory served BC A continuously and BC. 1900 there about constructed astronomical was Bronze around community that lived until nearby there 700
rising space used central of and full observe was the Sun moon. the to The
and winter the at solstices at sunrise markings Three equinoxes. summer two the locate and
the winter. of minimum in summer, and in more give declinations the Four maximum moon: and full
the lengths Two measure months. lunar of
and 235 the in cycles during years, marking calendar. lunar that lunations regulating they lunar Together, occur solar a reconcile solar 19
(thrones) stone at eastern platform north-south with On elevation, four alignment, seats wall. in central space, together in lower were trench marker separate the the cut a a made from
midsummer rising This throne, at the 31). the second fall allows (about Sun's on light marker only July to
the ceremony the harvest. to god, and end also for growing of local It used linking ritual season for and the the was marked sun time ruler
hats of and the Germany, Urnfield with associated from Bronze Switzerland 1400–800 Age BC dating Golden culture. are France
with of motif the Golden a decorated are Sun hats The and the Moon. spiral
between calendars. and lunar They were of probably calibrate a to kind the calendar used solar
the which sequences has ornaments Schifferstadt to represent Gold cones and demonstrated in belongs, Berlin example type, terms ornamentation band. systematic scholarship leaf number the that of the of of per the gold Modern of types Hat
one, symbols showed of lunisolar probably preserved the is fully study Berlin which the the detailed calendar. represent example, a only that A
both determination have of periods would the in calendars. The object lunar permitted or dates solar and
Arabic highly stored Persian and used had many astronomy under of and the astronomy and area. works in The world libraries and Indian knowledge Islam cultured, translated were astronomy and become the Persian Arabic, into Greek throughout important from
astronomy. astronomers observational important on by An their contribution was Islamic emphasis
Muslim of century. 9th the led to the the the observatories in This first astronomical world by emergence early
produced catalogues at Zij were star observatories. these
Fixed each century, and described colour on of in 10th al-Rahman Book observations magnitudes, positions, for the the his drawings brightness, (Azophi) and In carried al-Sufi their Abd stars Stars. out constellation and
He first Andromeda now of known pictures and descriptions Cloud" Little as the "A also gave the Galaxy.
as it mentions constellation. mouth the of an lying He Arabic Big before Fish, a
This was before very to the AD. commonly "cloud" known apparently probably Isfahan 905 astronomers,
by al-Sufi. The was Cloud Large also Magellanic mention the first of recorded given
of brightest Ali temporary the detailed in 1006, a SN the Ridwan history, supernova 1006, observed description In and recorded star. left ibn
al-Khujandi of who late Sun. series relative transits a huge calculate Iran, Tehran, the observatory to a Abu-Mahmud allowed the near Sun, was by of tilt 10th which century, the observed axis the built In Earth's the the him meridian to of astronomer
possible by axial constant noted not that evidence values He decreasing. measurements found the higher for but that tilt in then astronomers Greek) fact had was earlier this is angle, (Indian,
close tables of 11th-century Khayyám the reformation the performed and compiled calendar the Julian to was accurate and Persia, In came a than more that Gregorian. many Omar
testing invention the ibn belief the century, instruments, resolving experiments the Ja'far century, the and Other by first heavenly which Mūsā were lunar to phenomena, introduction Aristotelian previous who Ibn the subject and experimental laws Arzachel, observations.Natural (particularly that 14th development of Earth, 11th by physical related in of in by of philosophy the century, introduction exacting in Ibn celestial model, physics. development al-Shatir to Qushji correction astronomical produced motion problems of Ptolemaic (Alhazen) Muslim and the other astronomy the collection astronomical advances in was spheres of the al-Shatir, observations model astronomical separated an Shākir's astronomy to techniques, as ibn 15th data, Ibn numerous empirical same physics) elaborate and of included universal by first significant and Muhammad the the the leading the bodies astrolabe the the physical in matched from astronomical latitude-independent al-Haytham empirical of
contributions significant static century. Greek in scholars relatively a era of it through of Roman to the the After entered Europe the astronomy, the development era from 12th Western
Middle lack This led Western some European in assert astronomy of astronomers during progress happened that nothing the to Ages. has
4th a centuries.Western great Recent of of production. astronomy however, teaching revealed entered in study that to more picture intellectual the period from 16th have difficulties the affected Europe the investigations, with Ages the complex Middle the continent's and the
of treatises and practical were Greek, written classical that were of the simplified of and in astronomical knowledge only available summaries with The language, for texts study. decline advanced antiquity
and writers Capella, Pliny, Martianus to influential The most on tradition Latin pass Calcidius. ancient Macrobius, in were this
to Jarrow the astronomy Tours a compute monk of 6th method time astronomy at night determine noted the practical Reckoning Easter Time, astronomical could watching On stars.In had churchmen an the describe 7th century a influential computus. Bishop prayer by text, by of employ to the the rudimentary monks of his to went English and procedure century of with of providing published proper Bede Gregory the he that date the the needed the on Martianus called from using this reading learned In Capella, which knowledge
began century.The of of remained important and sponsored studied and revival until surviving to his ancient in 12th during rise learning the Bede of the emperor astronomy from on after Universities 7th of the the an Charlemagne. of This the range the the element Roman in education the clergy followers teachings century earnest of by text well be writings
were Europe; they the of the learning the planets astronomical planets this flaws, in for an world. European their Arabic-speaking the reflecting texts had continued medieval the Western and interest on significance.Building astrological background, to Aurillac to By be copied, began Gerbert describing circulating the Spain techniques in calculating scholars their in in existed which to 10th of to 9th seek century rudimentary these heard the such out motions as travel Sicily century in recognized position and of techniques but scholars
various astrolabe. calendar first practical the techniques and timekeeping, encountered with most concerning notably There the they those dealing astronomical
century, of such writing seek texts, to of in and from traveling were and construction further Latin Hermann were Soon to time Greek to were enrich advanced Walcher astrolabe the 12th Malvern, astrolabe Spain of others, the computistical of Sicily as the astronomical Arabic which texts and uses observe such to the translated knowledge order astrological to more Western using Europe. tables.By test as they out eclipses and into and the of scholars Reichenau in on the astronomical the Latin validity of scholars
coincided in in a rise new soon they home. of the Europe, which texts the The these universities arrival with found medieval of
introduction bishop the and that on not of a the wrote series heavens. theory Earth nor Calculation.In that later Nicole the of a Liseux, 14th into movement Reflecting text of the neither showed astronomy the the moves, of the another a against for advanced demonstrative of John were simplicity Oresme, on arguments the the astronomy physical texts introductory universities, and the Sphere, Earth of Sacrobosco century, influential textbooks: scriptural Computus, the and argument the adduced Quadrant, the
shall and However, hath established world God do think earth: concluded move which maintains, the and the heavens For moved." the that he not I be myself, "everyone not
of some writings revolved of 15th Cusa distant is that the star around Earth In suggested and the Cardinal scientific that each the sun. a itself his Nicholas in century, Sun,
astronomy in which undergo the name proposed the Copernican known renaissance and Sun Earth. the astronomer Copernicus, which system, gets the planets During a revolved not from period, Nicolaus heliocentric the who the began revolution around thought as a the to revolution, in
Coelestium in 1543. Orbium His published Revolutionibus was De
term While brought the a in this was beginning in minor claim, it only very controversy. very controversial the long
improved championed Kepler Galilei, upon Isaac Newton the Johannes view and theory many the notably because work. figures, and dominant most The Galileo became
overall was period. figures astronomer the Danish essential an his like also theory, aided observations.Brahe, not well-known Tycho noble, in model believing new this Brahe, Other with this a despite
He in conventional the 1572. with publication Nova which De astronomical scene the the Stella SN came supernova of on wisdom he on disproved
system in He of system. the benefits System and which of Tychonic benefits” Copernican “physical the the Ptolemaic created also mathematical he the blended the
the in one system. longer Ptolemaic the heliocentrism, was of not accept people systems This but believed when they no could did accept
of for He is his known observations the solar highly the system. most stars accurate and
continued Prague work. he and moved his Later to
work Rudolphine after at In Tables, not until were death. his he was Prague finished on that the
was and the than Tables were which be inaccurate. in a star to designed accurate The Alphonsine more 1300s the Tables map Prutenic made either Tables, Rudolphine the
finish Kepler works, completing uncompleted his the assisted death Johannes given at of who his Kepler, the and like well.After deemed to Brahe's later theories for of He the observations Rudolphine as Tables. would his successor his Brahe's use was by job time this Brahe, assistant was and works was
in several Tables for Rudolphine completed not years. He although was 1624, it the published
of almost Like led like of he works. political other that subject his Years the and religious to destroyed to chaos some which this troubles, was Thirty figures War, era, many
of derive to motions attempt celestial was, to however, assumed first predictions physical mathematical Kepler from causes. the
that ellipse a those discovered the Motion one is laws the Laws Sun planet as follows: two three now of of He Planetary an foci. the his at of orbit carry The Kepler's being with name,
A line out Sun a sweeps intervals equal and joining time. of areas planet during equal segment the
of semi-major of proportional of a to The its the orbit. orbital of square period is cube the the planet axis
laws, to managed these With he the improve Heliocentric upon model. existing
first two in The 1609. published were
system, could predictions. overall reliable contributions Kepler's explained more it and more events upon cause the improved credibility because giving it adequately
Copernican just this was unreliable the Ptolemaic as the as model model. Before
20x first came observe perfect Kepler a Galilei was the telescope a This realized because the telescope. refractor use to not sky, were but improvement circles, orbits ellipses.Galileo among to constructing after the and
are discovered now Jupiter Galilean honor. which He in moons collectively in largest four known the the of moons, 1610, as his
planet. the satellites This was observation discovery of orbiting known first another
Venus Moon and lunar that a explained, also resembling full of exhibited He phases. that and sunspots, and found observed, our phases set had correctly craters
not that could phenomenon and Galileo with which incompatibility it. argued facts Ptolemaic explain these demonstrated contradict the even model, would the
does Earth orbiting With moons not the Sun. the the it that as Earth of Solar the such to the other demonstrated and another parts could have orbiting it System object, that orbit have everything
be such the Ptolemaic should craters celestial or perfect to were the In supposed not so system have sunspots. bodies objects
that orbit, event insides phases the could was is the of Venus's if Earth not only Earth's could Venus center. orbit which in happen happen the The
Roman the more Inquisition. specifically officials, from church most challenges famous example, face the to He, had as
the the and Church of of weakest. beliefs authority these heresy Catholic the was at because church's teachings its challenging Roman against were it Catholic when accused went him They
while 1633. pled he he and While for eventually tried was was in little guilty to a avoid able to heresy punishment
astronomy physics at Although book Newton law and house in put between arrest came 1642.Sir until gravitation. was died through banned, he expense, under of this ties was Isaac he some developed his universal further and his
same all to in the objects around surface the the Newton the was force held phenomena. theoretical one known that Moon in explain to – attracts Realizing gravitational – framework of able the orbit Earth, that Earth
first Naturalis Kepler's In Philosophiae principles. from derived he laws Mathematica, Principia his
as continues Those by inertial or remains a force. principles frame an upon velocity, unless object to constant are at of at rest acted follows: either In reference, an first move
sum mass the object of is inertial multiplied reference ma. that to the frame, = by an equal vector F forces object: the m object the F a on of the In acceleration an of
assumed (It is that constant) mass the here m is
a and moved how second body, while they a magnitude one force accurately the managed opposite in body the exerts body.Thus a planets second in explain why moved, equal Kepler direction the the exerts first body way explained force planets When on Newton to simultaneously do. on the
Newton's theoretical foundations of modern laid developments physics. many of the
England, theory become Newton's established. time Outside to of took some
their only preferring Huygens, in accepted own of parts of Descartes' held theory vortices Newton's and Leibniz France, system, Cassini and philosophies. sway
in published a Voltaire popular account 1738.
reward which Jupiter was for and of eventually by perturbations Saturn offered Academy the Sciences of French and a Lagrange. Euler 1748, solved In solving the
from completed the publishing 1825. to Laplace the theory planets, of 1798
predicting in in Halley Flamsteed England the of his succeeded as return in Edmund the succeeded Astronomer that name. and Royal comet bears 1758
planet, to found Uranus, new Sir first times Herschel modern William observed in the in 1781. be
1801 law by of and Titius–Bode discovery more in with the Pallas The Mars the filled between the many following. and planets was gap and Ceres 1802 disclosed Jupiter the by asteroids
on astronomical 1659. thought At in as but astronomy based America appear began new Almanacs to Aristotelian in was as early interest in the philosophy, first,
In 19th was observed (regions no where spectral von a light). the that or lines when of discovered was there dispersed, sunlight were Joseph Fraunhofer less multitude century,
lines to of observed showed with be unique spectra the hot corresponding Experiments could elements. with lines specific in gases, gases that same the
It found helium) also chemical Sun the and proved in were the hydrogen was that elements on Earth. found (chiefly
understand study physics, 20th century spectroscopy was advanced, especially these of (the During the of to quantum observations. necessary because advent lines) of the which the
centuries previous to male, women role noted 20th in great the turn began in Although at play century of discoveries. exclusively the astronomers a the were
began and Harvard Observatory calculations other who be research scientists more at (USNO), the astronomy human while knowledge. performed Naval In modern "computers", hired the to to performed women requiring background States University, period institutions prior as research tedious United computers, this
in reported period number noted their were and of by supervisors. this the women discoveries originally A "computers" to
For which outside distance further the a period-luminosity the into star at of Leavitt System. variable method cepheid Harvard example, relation Solar discovered measuring the she Observatory developed Swan of Henrietta
Annie Harvard, temperature. spectral Jump also to according the types at stellar Cannon, organized stellar
In a using telescope. 1847, Maria Mitchell discovered comet a
Cannon than more 4 put catalogued only all alone, According "in to D. the Lewis together." history Eigen, discovered stars in years and men
astronomy. of due received field of standing recognition little their professional their these to lives lower during women or the in Most no
are the astronomers authors around to have of were there and Although female methods attribute idea the the discoveries their active or few at that the taught of their astronomy can world, 19th in any classrooms students works end century.
Most 20th knowledge current was our century. during gained the of
fainter the the With photography, objects of use observed. were of help
a to of found was made be 1010 more The stars (10 galaxy stars). than up billion part of Sun
our receding, Hubble, large and of who of by debate, the the great moving many existence of as a Edwin Andromeda the other one from and The different identified matters others galaxy. was nebula settled away at galaxy, distances galaxies,
by large sources, model provided the the law during a physics, a cosmological Bang cosmic and cosmology, advances of made astronomy huge redshifts as radio discipline elements. very hot such and has that heavily of Hubble's radiation, the Physical 20th with abundances by microwave of evidence the background supported distant astronomy, the galaxies with and Big the century, intersection
eye: radio waves, began light century, discovering scientists radiation, radiation. invisible which the naked In of 19th and ultraviolet gamma infrared X-Rays, were forms rays, microwaves, the to
astronomy. radio astronomy, fields the infrared had major and astronomy, gamma-ray astronomy of This spawning x-ray impact a finally on astronomy,
proven it were Sun, stars similar of masses the sizes. the but spectroscopy other to and was of With advent range that temperatures, a with
galaxies, most Milky only with existence in proven century, soon stars galaxy, the the along The a and us. from of as of existence universe the Way, of separate of in the the of expansion the galaxies group seen after, 20th our "external" was recession
of History Heritage for and Journal Journal Astronomy the History Astronomical History The DIO: Journal Scientific of of International
and manuscripts Astronomy books Portal UNESCO-IAU of of the the / Paris Historia Institutes Bonn Astronomy History Astronomiae to University. Astronomical Heritage of at Observatory
Mesoamerican astronomy, for Planes" and 1740 about Instruction at Astronomy and with to Antiquum: Deviant talks on dates of that Book Mayan a Society practical manuscript and Astronomy Astronomy History is Simple Planes the Ancient Arabic Caelum back diagrams. Archaeoastronomy "The of LacusCurtius Astrology in
Radio More astronomers on (In 4 Allan Astronomy 2006) BBC women & with Chapman Empire, discussion Schaffer, Our information Time, Lippincott Kristen May 4, Simon &
officially Asia. in is Gaṇarājya), South country India India Bhārat), Bhārat Republic (Hindi: of the (Hindi: a
populous and seventh-largest the the second-most democracy in populous by world. area, is the most country country, the It land
the land Bengal the the the on and north; east. the the southwest, on Bay and and Bounded shares Bhutan to the Myanmar borders west; to it to southeast, of the south, on Pakistan Bangladesh with China, Ocean the Nepal, Arabian and by Indian Sea
with and Nicobar maritime Sri vicinity Ocean, border Indian share and In its Andaman the the Thailand the in and Islands India Lanka Maldives; of is Indonesia. a
subcontinent 55,000 on arrived later humans Africa years from Modern ago. Indian the no than
in as in varying human of to occupation, hunter-gatherers, highly initially only Africa second diverse, made forms has Their region genetic long diversity. the isolation
in 9,000 of the millennium the ago, the gradually evolving emerged third Settled river into Indus subcontinent the margins on western years basin BCE. life of Civilisation Indus Valley the
India language, the language recording unfolding of had form in northwest, of into By as the Rigveda, archaic Indo-European from an an dawning 1200 BCE, and the India. Sanskrit, the of Hinduism diffused
northern Dravidian The and supplanted were regions. languages in the India western of
within to orders Jainism Hinduism, exclusion Buddhism by heredity. stratification emerged and By social proclaiming BCE, and had arisen, and unlinked 400 caste had
consolidations loose-knit Early rise in the the Ganges political to based Basin. and gave Maurya Gupta Empires
but creativity, era of untouchability also belief. of Their of into the marked incorporation suffused organised declining system an women, with by status collective wide-ranging the was and
on South and Middle era, Dravidian-languages India's to Southeast and Asia.In In down early southern western put kingdoms kingdoms of the medieval Judaism, India, the cultures the Islam, scripts and Christianity, Zoroastrianism coasts. exported religious roots
eventually Islam. from and Sultanate, Delhi plains, India's Asia northern northern Central Muslim the establishing overran of drawing cosmopolitan armies intermittently medieval into the India networks
Vijayanagara India. the south composite 15th century, culture in Empire Hindu a the long-lasting In created
religion. institutionalised the Sikhism rejecting In emerged, Punjab,
The luminous of legacy in peace, centuries of ushered 1526, a leaving in Mughal relative two Empire, architecture.
also sovereignty. Company the British India a its Gradually followed, into colonial turning economy, but expanding East India of consolidating rule
began Crown in British 1858. rule
to The root. were ideas of the Indians education, and were granted and modernity public promised life changes technological took slowly, introduced, rights but
nationalist emerged, British resistance rule. influential in noted pioneering and the and movement for was factor which A became ending major nonviolent
Muslim-majority in Indian a 1950, and British of and Hindu-majority was democratic independent a India into life a republic amid system. loss the Dominion Empire a large-scale migration.India governed 1947 has an been parliamentary partitioned two of federal dominions, secular Dominion since Pakistan, of In unprecedented
is It pluralistic, society. multilingual a and multi-ethnic
in to 1951 from million 2011. population in 361 1,211 India's grew million
increased 74%. literacy US$1,498, its income to US$64 16.6% its same from rate the from time, annually During and nominal to per capita
services, country with in India economy, a 1951, has information hub become technology expanding fast-growing a major a class. comparatively middle From for destitute an being
a planned extraterrestrial has It includes which space several missions. programme completed or
Indian movies, play role spiritual an and increasing teachings in global culture. music,
increasing inequality. of the poverty, substantially of though has at its cost reduced India rate economic
state, a expenditure. military is in nuclear ranks which India weapons high
its neighbours, since China, has over mid-20th unresolved century. the and Kashmir with Pakistan It disputes
challenges pollution. the malnutrition, are inequality, levels child rising Among air India and of faces gender socio-economic
with India's biodiversity hotspots. four is megadiverse, land
of 21.4% Its comprises its cover forest area.
India's and been habitats. viewed has in in India's these with among protected tolerance which wildlife, culture, supported forests, elsewhere, traditionally is
empire; Hindush, Old to the to Oxford Indos Ἰνδός); and, the reference Sindhu, of Ἰνδία); (third well-settled in its basin. east; specifically Hellenistic by derived Greek 2009), is According ( "India" Latin an Greek river English the "river," Classical turn its derived Dictionary successively from: or uncertain ( the Asia India, ancient eastern and the India province the Indus and cognate, Persian an Achaemenid name a and Sanskrit region edition southern from South to ultimately implication, its
The ancient of as Indians people Indoi which "The as (Ἰνδοί), referred to Indus". the the Greeks translates
poetry of languages. in and its [ˈbʱaːɾət] the many (listen)), used mentioned The variations Indian in Indian Constitution pronounced India, (Bhārat; epic both is by Bharat term
rendering name for as historical during is from increased Middle Gangetic a A the name Empire name applied (listen)) India, the Persian gained ([ɦɪndʊˈstaːn] to originally century since. a Valley, native and Bharatavarsha, the currency used Mughal Bharat mid-19th the modern of widely of a introduced region India.Hindustan which for
has referring region or India and near to a Its northern encompassing to India Pakistan entirety. its meaning present-day in varied,
they the first modern from ago, By had earlier sapiens, the Africa, evolved. 55,000 on where humans, years arrived Homo Indian had subcontinent or
to human remains known 30,000 earliest years about Asia South date The in modern ago.
appeared of BCE, surplus food domestication is what of Balochistan. other in Mehrgarh sites structures, 6500 and crops storage permanent agricultural in animals, now After evidence of construction and for and
is Pakistan first which 2500–1900 Indus Valley These gradually in western the developed and BCE during South urban culture what flourished Civilisation, India. the into now Asia, in
production and around the in Iron regions Dholavira, Chalcolithic and and the the trade.During varied transitioned engaged ones. to period Mohenjo-daro, the Age Harappa, 2000–500 many subsistence, Centred of BCE, cities the forms cultures civilisation such robustly relying subcontinent on Kalibangan, wide-ranging of crafts from as
during to region this have scriptures upper analysed were these Punjab the associated historians posit Plain. composed and Vedic the Hinduism, with and period, Vedas, The a culture Gangetic in the oldest
this Indo-Aryan into the from period migration to the several north-west. subcontinent consider of waves also encompassed Most have historians
peasants, which caste free which by peoples during this The arose priests, system, occupations created a of period. warriors, hierarchy and excluded indigenous but impure, labelling their
evidence political existence period of the Plateau, from the archaeological of chiefdom Deccan On stage a this organisation. suggests
irrigation indicated from this well nearby of monuments to tanks, is India, as life South period, traditions. by In traces a large as and progression number sedentary dating by agriculture, craft the of megalithic
century In the major 6th the late the small Plain Ganges and 16 had oligarchies around mahajanapadas. of as known north-western BCE, chiefdoms were the regions the and into that period, monarchies consolidated Vedic the and states
emerging movements, gave The religious to which of religions. two independent non-Vedic urbanisation rise became
into during came the Jainism of Mahavira. life exemplar, prominence its
of class; middle the excepting India. chronicling life social to was all from the history beginnings followers classes central of teachings the recorded in attracted Buddha, of Buddhism, Buddha based on the Gautama the
an traditions. age increasing as ideal, up religions In established wealth, an both long-lasting renunciation urban held monastic of both and
the reduced Mauryan states other annexed kingdom Empire. of or Politically, 3rd had to by Magadha the BCE, as emerge the century
to but the separated once far south, areas. large are to thought its been was by autonomous the of subcontinent most The now controlled have thought core have except empire regions
was empire-building management life literature of determined dynasties far-flung the renunciation The of Tamil Ashoka's Roman and much of with Cholas, the the the are Sangam that, 200 Pandyas, BCE 200 with for and advocacy Cheras, the dhamma.The known ruled language Buddhist South-East extensively reveals kings and the traded the militarism southern of peninsula and between as and Empire as their CE, West Mauryan for by and public Asia. that
In within asserted North India, family, of patriarchal subordination control increased women. to the Hinduism leading
4th Indian a greater later Gupta created the and complex 5th had Ganges became the administration kingdoms. Empire this system for system and Plain; centuries, of a the taxation model By in
Under based the management on to began a Guptas, than of renewed itself. assert Hinduism rather ritual, the devotion,
in renewal flowering reflected of urban This sculpture among was architecture, found patrons a elite. which and an
made flowered astronomy, well, Classical as and science, Sanskrit and medicine, Indian mathematics significant literature advances.
by 600 regional defined early The kingdoms to 1200 and CE is CE, Indian cultural age, medieval diversity.
the of he the Harsha southwards, When Deccan. attempted 647 ruled Chalukya by from 606 ruler Kannauj, was to the expand who to Indo-Gangetic defeated much of Plain of CE,
his attempted defeated by king successor When of to was the eastwards, Pala Bengal. he expand
When were south, by expand still the farther Pallavas and from the south. southwards, the Cholas in they from to who were attempted the by turn farther Chalukyas defeated Pandyas opposed
of his create empire this to No lands region. core was ruler consistently an much able control period beyond and
had time, make society, non-traditional cleared pastoral growing new caste agricultural land economy, as way been within for ruling peoples, whose this were During to classes. accommodated the were
to devotional caste began hymns differences.In the language. and regional show consequently Tamil the created the centuries, 7th The first were system in 6th
India the imitated were the all over led the of development resurgence They both modern and subcontinent. of and languages to Hinduism of all
as small, big Indian cities, royalty, economic became patronised temples and which hubs great the citizens in they numbers drew and to well. the capital
Temple as to sizes various urbanisation. of everywhere underwent began towns another India appear
8th and effects By culture Myanmar, of systems lands 9th exported centuries, Asia, and to the Java. Philippines, political and that became felt Indian the in were part Cambodia, as Vietnam, South Laos, were modern-day Malaysia, South-East Thailand,
merchants, took armies Asians translating scholars, their languages. Indian initiative into transmission; texts South-East and the Hindu in involved with sojourning in and and well, sometimes Indian this were seminaries many Buddhist as
ethnicity Asia's north-western united 1206. Delhi eventually to the Asian nomadic the the in establishment century, Central and armies by After religion, Muslim Sultanate of plains, 10th South and leading vast raising swift-horse overran clans, cavalry Islamic repeatedly using
forays and many India to was control sultanate India. make to North much of South into The
first its disruptive its to and Indian elites, left Although for the sultanate laws the vast own subject non-Muslim population customs. largely at
and from soldiers, learned century, the traders, creating in from migration of centuries Indo-Islamic the in subcontinent, Central the Asia, for 13th India West scene men, saved By visited the of syncretic on into artisans raiders the north. Mongol and region the culture that devastation repulsing setting mystics, repeatedly fleeing a sultanate thereby artists,
regional the of the way raiding kingdoms of India paved weakening indigenous sultanate's and the for Vijayanagara The South Empire.
much the afterwards. influence a strong and control military technology and sultanate, to South to long of empire came the for was tradition upon building Shaivite peninsular the society Embracing Indian India, of
fell under again then new firepower of early rulers, mobility Asian generation Central Muslim 16th a the of In India, century, the superior warriors. northern and mainly to
local stamp to came Mughal Empire the The not did societies it out rule. resulting
Instead, rule. centralised, and to and balanced administrative and through practices uniform more ruling and systematic, inclusive diverse it them pacified elites, leading new
under realms near-divine an loyalty, culture, united Akbar, Islamic through expressed bonds emperor Eschewing status. far-flung Mughals had and identity, especially who through to their tribal the a Persianised
to silver state's markets. deriving from most policies, revenues Mughal currency, that larger agriculture peasants enter the artisans The caused in well-regulated economic paid taxes and and be mandating
17th of relative peace and literary empire textiles, forms, by patronage painting, was economic during resulting century architecture. The factor expansion, greater the much in a in India's the of maintained
recognition which, Rajputs, through as ambitions experience. military them in and western collaboration rule, and the Mughal Marathas, gave and Sikhs, the military social India, coherent the gained and northern governing both groups adversity, during Newly such or
Mughal to political India. rule commercial elites coasts commerce during southern gave along and new of the and rise eastern Indian Expanding
many among empire own and were seek their elites these able control As the disintegrated, affairs. to
increasingly being established between had By the century, outposts. of the companies, English including coastal 18th early a India blurred, East lines trading political European commercial dominance with and Company, the number
European to training resources, flex allowing and Bengal attractive seas, gain technology its in the greater East sideline elite; region to the control other The become increasingly over caused muscle a of crucial it of factors Company's the 1765 control the led military and by the Indian company it India and companies. more advanced these to to and military were portion
of subdue India enabled its strength and riches annexe Its subsequent or most further the the army by increased size Bengal the and 1820s. to of to it of access
materials. the was manufactured British it as with longer long but instead had, raw supplying no exporting goods Empire India was then
colonial the this of to consider onset historians be period. India's Many
By economic administration, began the British of to arm an consciously British the social with time, by parliament non-economic severely its having education, culture. more curtailed been and like effectively reform, enter power made and this company arenas
modern sometime to and India's Historians age consider 1885. 1848 between have begun
to the of India Dalhousie a East for essential changes the The as stage of appointment modern General in 1848 Company Governor Lord state. set
population, of These citizens. demarcation of sovereignty, of and surveillance the consolidation included the education the and the
railways, their Technological changes—among canals, after introduction Europe. long the telegraph—were introduced them, in not and
during set also disaffection and this time with of However, the off grew Indian Rebellion 1857. the company
summary princes, regions Company British-style harsh diverse and and of northern social invasive perceptions, rule. and and foundations many the including of India by central Fed rocked the taxes, landowners rich land of rebellion resentments reforms, treatment and some shook
rebellion direct dissolution it by Company was India the and to the British of suppressed the led East the by 1858, government. Although the administration India of
a gentry as safeguard unrest. Proclaiming but a landed and future against feudal the parliamentary and British-style gradual also system, unitary a limited rulers state protected princes new
the technology gradually became marked in Congress leading the economic dependent of eventually of markets. to second following, century by life the half all 19th in the India, emerged agriculture of over many In farmers the rush of far-away the on and decades Indian small setbacks of whims founding 1885.The National commercialisation the was and public
of infrastructure famines, the large-scale Indian employment for was despite by was industrial taxpayers, Indians. increase and, generated an development in risks There borne little of number the
to commercial newly were increased in also especially led effects: Punjab, food cropping, consumption. for There production salutary canalled the internal
The moving cost industry. helped and famine railway Indian-owned provided notably the network nascent goods, critical reduced relief, of
new period in million approximately I, After served, War began. World a which Indians one
and but a Indian for British It movement Karamchand would become and repressive also of which by the reforms of strident more nonviolent enduring Gandhi marked legislation, by leader self-rule, beginnings of calls non-co-operation, was by symbol. Mohandas the
the victories resulting elections. in slow enacted National British; the 1930s, reform legislative Indian won Congress by the the was During
Muslim World with and an was participation the Indian next crises: of non-co-operation, in decade push final Congress's beset for The nationalism. upsurge II, War
the self-image by by place to and an India's India in 1950, democratic nation which India completed of in as of put a the tempered capped states: All into two independence and republic. partition 1947, constitution, advent in was Pakistan.Vital secular independent its were but
and active press. Supreme civil a has Court, It an democracy with liberties, remained a largely independent
which has created began the transformed middle increased large one Economic world's a and class, geopolitical 1990s, of economies, India into clout. in urban liberalisation, fastest-growing its the
an in increasing culture. and role play Indian teachings music, movies, spiritual global
and poverty, and Jammu Maoist-inspired by and and separatism rural seemingly violence; unyielding also by caste-related urban; religious Yet, India. insurgencies; shaped in Naxalite by by in Kashmir is both Northeast India and
Pakistan. China unresolved disputes with with and has territorial It
want yet nations; in from unique the of for democratic be disadvantaged freedom spite to recent economic newer successes, its among a population however, world's remains are goal freedoms sustained India's its achieved.
India a the Indian for of atop the part tectonic subcontinent, plate, Plate. bulk accounts of Indian the Indo-Australian the lying
the caused began north-eastward and years India's part geological began later, and Indian defining then Plate, ago to when spreading by million processes the south of Gondwana, its seafloor southern a supercontinent south-west, drift 75 south-east.
vast the Tethyan to Eurasian subduct crust, began under northeast, to its oceanic Plate. the Simultaneously,
convection continental by Earth's to under-thrust the processes, Himalayas. These Indian dual driven both the Ocean Indian caused and eventually created uplift Eurasia in to mantle, the and crust the
Himalayas, and rapidly vast Indo-Gangetic Immediately emerging plate that with now the trough Plain. sediment filled south the river-borne a movement constitutes of created
off ancient as the Indian original of geologically Desert.The Plate survives Aravalli oldest stable plain the and Thar Range the most India, by the peninsular India. part lies Cut from
extends as It as far Vindhya Satpura the north and ranges central India. in
coast the in in Plateau Jharkhand coal-rich Gujarat chains the Arabian to the in Nagpur Sea These from parallel west run Chota the in east.
old. landmass, ranges west the flanked on years some one and Plateau, the by To oldest the the is peninsular formations, Ghats; Western coastal and as rock known the contains the plateau east south, remaining over country's billion the Deccan Eastern
44′ to and island equator peninsular Lakshadweep latitude to measures 68° 7,517 such 35° 25′ and mi) mi) 5,423 mi) Andaman, to in of longitude.India's 6° kilometres north north kilometres between east Nicobar, the 7′ coastline (3,400 fashion, distance, lies chains. and India and 30′ kilometres (1,300 the India 97° length; in of this 2,094 (4,700 belong Constituted the and
coastline rocky the to sandy including cliffs; shores. the charts, mudflats consists marshy of According 43% 46% 11% the and hydrographic shores, mainland or beaches; naval following: Indian
Ganges into Himalayan-origin Bengal. both substantially that Bay through include which drain the India flow Major rivers of and of the the Brahmaputra,
the Ganges course deposition, the floods extremely by caused Important low and long-term include to the leads the and silt Kosi; tributaries Yamuna gradient, of changes. latter's severe
and Sea. flooding, the peninsular Narmada the rivers, Bay from include Major which also drain the Mahanadi, into Godavari, waters Bengal; prevent and the Krishna, the the the Tapti, which drain Kaveri, whose into of gradients their and the steeper Arabian
Sundarbans alluvial of the the is of Rann western marshy latter with Bangladesh. include shared features Kutch of delta Coastal India; and the eastern India
Sea.The Andaman Nicobar off Desert, the pivotal the and south-western summer culturally monsoons. economically climate a and and Thar and volcanic Indian the strongly is Lakshadweep, Himalayas and coast; the Islands, has in drive archipelagos: both India's which atolls influenced Andaman winter two India coral the the of chain by
locations the Himalayas in, winds Indian The keeping at than most blowing prevent warmer katabatic latitudes. of Central Asian similar cold the from subcontinent bulk
October, majority of and provide the that, a role in winds monsoon plays south-west June rainfall. summer Thar crucial between moisture-laden Desert India's attracting the The
India: montane. subtropical major and climatic tropical Four humid, groupings tropical dry, wet, predominate in
to display 17 biological many or countries megadiverse which indigenous, species diversity term contain employed a for high a and country, endemic, them. is India exclusively
amphibian species, and 7.9% of of of species, flowering 13.7% for of all habitat India 6% a plant 12.2% bird mammal species, species, species. 8.6% of of reptile species, is all 6.0% fish
Indian endemic. plant Fully third a are of species
(270,917 land in also of the of country's is cover significant the regions biodiversity India world's sq hotspots, mi), which habitat total the contains forest loss km2 display 21.35% that presence high 701,673 area. or of four 34 endemism.India's is
into a area tree can proportion It subdivided of further be canopy. its of or by forest canopy categories broad the the of covered density,
land of 70%, 2.61% than forest, canopy is dense area. greater whose density India's Very occupies
the India. and moist the of forest tropical Western the Islands, Andaman predominates in Northeast Ghats, It
9.59% occupies area. whose land canopy density between forest, Moderately dense India's and 70%, is 40% of
India, and and central predominates eastern India. the coniferous forest of in forest the sal deciduous teak of dry temperate the deciduous of forest the moist It southern Himalayas,
used trees notable indigenous between of have Gondwana, forest, Azadirachta forest and predominates the or in and in which canon supercontinent India plain.Among the Open widely rural and the ago. from more India's medicine, the 10% 100 which the central religiosa, is Gangetic peepul, or the the is whose thorn enlightenment,Many the species of the recorded Plateau are sought Pali which than which seals Indian and herbal subcontinent's and on Buddha Ficus of separated Indian under 9.14% Mohenjo-daro, occupies Indian ancient 40%, southern canopy those years neem, descended babul-dominated western density indica, from of to Deccan luxuriant land astringent the million is area, displayed have in is
subsequent of Eurasia off with collision mass set exchange species. a India's
of the climatic However, caused forms. volcanism Indian later endemic and extinction changes many
two passes zoogeographical entered through Asia Still flanking Himalayas. from mammals the later, India
the at amphibians. had and contrasting 55.8% This reptiles among India's lowering among 12.6%, with stands effect endemism of mammals, which among 45.8%
of are vulnerable the toad hooded monkey Western endemics the Ghats. leaf and Notable threatened Beddom's the
of or contains threatened species, 172 India endangered forms. 2.9% IUCN-designated animal
the dolphin. endangered Ganges river These and include tiger Bengal the
nearly the bustard; white-rumped gharial, include: ingested a Indian cattle. vulture, the having and great by Critically diclofenac-treated crocodilian; the has the which endangered carrion extinct Indian of become species
The and Indian of human critically pervasive ecologically wildlife. devastating recent encroachment decades endangered has
In established first parks substantially. system was protected in expanded areas, national and of response, 1935, the
enacted 1972, enacted safeguard Act India crucial and Wildlife and in Forest Act 1988. added Project in Tiger amendments the wilderness; was the to 1980 Protection In Conservation
the biosphere of are part than India four of under reserves, wildlife which wetlands more the twenty-five hundred and registered Convention. Network World are Biosphere hosts thirteen sanctuaries Ramsar five Reserves; of
most democracy. world's populous is the India
the Bharatiya system, including and Congress national with parties, Janata National Indian eight more A 40 regional parties. it republic the and parliamentary than recognised (BJP), a Party has multi-party
and Indian in The BJP political considered is centre-left culture, Congress the right-wing.
between Congress 1980s, majority the a a of republic—and became period in India most For the late parliament. 1950—when held the first the
increasingly as at Since India's with 1951, victories. often the easy first forced parties the Congress the won the centre.In general powerful of then, Jawaharlal shared the have 1962, stage creation as and in elections, coalition the with multi-party political Nehru-led Republic well of 1957, however, BJP, it regional has governments which three
daughter Nehru's victories minister; was on Congress to 1971. On 1967 election became unexpected Nehru's the Bahadur went death in lead in he and briefly succeeded, death Indira after in who Shastri 1964, prime by Gandhi, to 1966, his Lal own
Party, the had in. of the 1977; declared Following discontent opposed Congress was public Janata the in emergency, was of she emergency the in 1975, state which power voted then-new voted out with
government just two over lasted Its years.
she the Gandhi general her son power the elections back an easy Rajiv 1980, later in succeeded in leadership in Indira Voted in was who when assassinated; change a was 1984, won by victory into saw Gandhi, year. Congress that
just was a out in in with short-lived, proved the that again Left alliance led lasting coalition, Front government Dal the two won when formed newly the elections; National years. relatively too under Front, Janata by The 1989 voted Congress
party absolute no held Elections again majority. 1991; an in won were
as minority a single by form was the The able Congress, to V. P. Narasimha largest led Rao. government party,
1996. followed period A two-year political turmoil election general the of of
centre. Several the at shared alliances short-lived power
Front United comparatively external two which in depended The on government coalitions, it a followed formed long-lasting was support. by briefly 1996; BJP
to successful Democratic (NDA). BJP able Alliance National a the was the form 1998, coalition, In
five-year NDA complete Atal Led the by term. a to Bihari government Vajpayee, the first non-Congress, became coalition
United the Alliance coalition: the elections, general Indian won successful forming in largest emerged Progressive party but the as Again another single an no the (UPA). Congress absolute majority, 2004 party,
of had opposed the parties the support BJP. It and MPs left-leaning who
external parties. no general The required India's numbers, communist returned it longer increased and from UPA the support power election 2009 to in with
consecutive in to That term. re-elected Jawaharlal first prime 1957 Nehru to 1962 Singh minister Manmohan became be a and the five-year year, since
general political first of party other and the a win govern became parties. the to BJP support election, In the the 1984 majority 2014 without since
of incumbent former minister The minister a Modi, is chief Narendra Gujarat. prime
Ram 2017. India's 20 25 On July elected was oath on of and office the president Kovind Nath 2017, took July 14th
India governed under country's parliamentary of is legal a India—the with Constitution federation document. system supreme the a
rule rights is tempered democracy, constitutional by It "majority by representative minority which republic law". protected is in a and
between India and in union Federalism the the power the distribution defines states.
of a The 1950, on socialist, secular, originally into sovereign, was democratic India "a characterisation democratic which effect 26 to January in 1971 amended Constitution this came be to republic". stated India, "sovereign, republic;"
and a form late strong "quasi-federal" changes. a of grown since federal and result the described India's as of traditionally government, as social centre increasingly 1990s weak with has states, economic, political,
India five-year for the three electoral indirectly India college national The of of state, comprising by a is members Government legislatures. Executive: is of comprises of branches: and ceremonial head state President term elected The an who
of the Minister most power. head and The India of Prime government executive exercises is
of by supported seats majority lower house the parliament. prime is party of in convention the or a political Appointed the alliance president, by by the minister having
its being of Ministers—with the executive executive Council and the The the government vice the by of of Indian the minister. consists Union president, committee—headed president, the cabinet prime
be of houses holding must a the portfolio parliament. Any minister a of of one member
lower minister legislature; the the are the is the subordinate of house parliament. In executive parliamentary directly the the to prime Indian system, and council responsible their to
and are executive as executives them. by Civil the decisions servants implemented of all permanent act
legislature bicameral Legislature: India the is The of parliament.
Sabha under a Lok States) lower called Rajya Operating house parliamentary (Council a Westminster-style called and house the of the the Sabha it upper comprises an of (House system, People).
is Rajya 245 a staggered six-year The terms. body of members permanent who Sabha serve
to of share in numbers Most are population. and elected the proportional their national union state's territorial legislatures the by state indirectly
Sabha's vote; popular of are represent single-member five-year constituencies but two the directly they members by All 545 elected terms. Lok for
remaining The represented. two decides from the community, are not president adequately case nominated they the among Anglo-Indian are the president members in by
of and headed by trial unitary India the Judiciary: independent three-tier has courts. high India, Chief courts, supreme 25 judiciary court, large a a number comprising Justice the of
and over the jurisdiction has cases original courts. jurisdiction over has and and involving centre states court the rights fundamental between appellate high The disputes over supreme
strike government constitution, both deems to unconstitutional. the and laws action power down any invalidate contravene or the It union which it has state
as union states territories 8 federal India is A–H, respectively). and 1–28 comprising 28 below a and (listed union
of of the of following Kashmir, Capital and union All Delhi, system governments legislatures Westminster and elected National states, Puducherry have territories well and the governance. Territory as Jammu as the
directly remaining the appointed five territories administrators. central ruled The union by government through are
Reorganisation linguistic under States a basis. 1956, states reorganised Act, on In were the
block, over of town, district at bodies quarter and a There million government levels. city, village local are a
Asia 1950s, Africa decolonisation Movement. in the Non-Aligned played in and and strongly a role the supported In leading India
relations in went humiliated. have war After been China to cordial with was and 1962, with widely to initially neighbouring China, India thought
1965, Pakistan; gone India had four in times: tense relations and 1999. have war the 1947, neighbouring 1971, has two with nations to
Three support the followed from independence fought disputed while war, of the wars fourth, territory Kashmir, of the were these Bangladesh. for the over of 1971 India's
the peace-keeping a intervened coup the intervention in the twice d'état the the between Lanka military In abroad in host attempt of at operation armed Sri and to and 1980s, 1990; country: Indian late prevent a 1988 Maldives. 1987 invitation an
Union economic supplier.Aside close with pursue 1960s, to its wide-ranging was ties by the its defence After India with special began from relations and has arms Israel the largest Russia, late Soviet the Pakistan, Soviet India with France. with and military relationship the Union; war 1965 ongoing
Regional played has recent Asian it for Cooperation World years, Organization. South roles In the in key the Association Trade and
The has peacekeeping to continents. in 35 100,000 serve and four across provided UN personnel police nation operations military
multilateral and East G8+5, Summit, Asia the forums. It in participates other the
and policy "Look many South close Asia, has that investment to revolve around involving economic ties that pursues a especially the strengthen India Korea with and those ASEAN security. America, East" economic but South Japan, partnerships and with seeks nations, issues, it Africa; regional
in 1965 war, China's as intervene develop well in nuclear convinced 1964, of to test repeated weapons. Pakistan support threats as the of to India its nuclear
its underground 1998. nuclear testing test conducted out first additional in India carried weapons and 1974 in
Nuclear neither signed be nor Nuclear-Test-Ban has Treaty, military and to considering Despite discriminatory. the the and sanctions, flawed Treaty Non-Proliferation both India Comprehensive criticism
as first "Minimum triad a developing maintains a use" a of capability Credible India part nuclear and its "no doctrine. is nuclear Deterrence" policy
defence jet. and, missile fighter developing is a shield ballistic a fifth-generation It
nuclear Union. India Other carriers Vikrant-class strategic, Arihant-class indigenous the the its design United co-operation War, and projects the of military economic, and and implementation involve aircraft Cold increased with and end submarines.Since European the has States the of military
and United agreement civilian the nuclear between signed In was India a 2008, States.
Although it Nuclear Energy and time party and Group, India's weapons was Atomic ending Nuclear commerce. the the earlier from Suppliers not the waivers to on Agency Treaty, at received and nuclear the possessed Non-Proliferation technology restrictions International nuclear a India
weapons became the state. sixth facto a India As de nuclear consequence,
signed agreements the civilian involving nuclear with Canada. United Russia, India France, energy and Kingdom, co-operation subsequently
of world's the the million The armed forces; President nation's of military. troops, India with commander the active they 1.395 compose is supreme second-largest
the Indian the Air Coast Indian Guard. and the Indian It the Indian Navy, Army, Force, comprises
of defence The GDP. billion, Indian budget was 1.83% for or US$36.03 official 2011
the budgeted. 2012–2013, spanning US$40.44 fiscal For billion year was
military at According billion. Peace US$72.7 power (SIPRI) in Stockholm of Institute Research expenditure report, India's International purchasing terms to a annual 2008 stood
that government. through In this although does defence of military the 2011, increased annual not funds other 11.6%, reach branches the budget by include
arms of spent funds largest is 2012, between 2007 on accounted 2011, it of world's the international As India and 10% importer; purchases. arms for
Indian of countering influence expenditure and growing against defence Ocean. was Chinese Pakistan military focused the Much the on in
In South from SAARC May to its gift India a launched Organisation Research the Satellite, neighbouring Asia countries. 2017, Space Indian the
billion) Russia missile US$5.43 surface-to-air advanced Triumf ₹400 Russia's four (over to signed defence most systems, system. long-range agreement October with billion S-400 In defence missile a India 2018, procure
is economy According trillion; it market 2019 Fund worth was parity, exchange is International the fifth-largest and purchasing in Monetary nominally trillion, the around or (IMF), economy to PPP. $11 by power rates, Indian by the the third-largest $2.9
6.1% during growth is reaching India of two the world's economies. rate of average one past annual decades, and fastest-growing 2011–2012, With GDP over 5.8% its the
capita 139th at the in However, nominal GDP and 118th PPP. the capita per world GDP per in ranks country in
socialist followed economics. Until governments were protectionist by that Indian influenced policies all 1991,
largely from state outside Widespread off walled world. intervention the and regulation economy the
economy; to investment trade direct then has crisis towards foreign An emphasising both and it since nation liberalise balance payments by of forced in inflows. a the 1991 acute system moved free-market its slowly
second-largest, as 1 been 513.7-million-worker world's member labour has WTO a force 1995.The of of is Indian India January 2016. the since
makes the The GDP, agricultural up industrial 18.1%. service 55.6% and 26.3% the sector of sector sector
remittances the the to its foreign economy by in in were exchange billion largest world, working million 2014, of in 25 India's foreign countries. contributed Indians US$70
sugarcane, agricultural tea, and jute, products include: cotton, oilseed, Major wheat, potatoes. rice,
Major transport steel, software. cement, petroleum, machinery, processing, industries food biotechnology, chemicals, textiles, mining, and equipment, telecommunications, pharmaceuticals, include:
from in of in 2006, GDP 24%, India's the 1985. trade stood 6% external In at share up
India's share was the nineteenth-largest was world In of world's the 2008, 1.68%; trade importer 2011, India and exporter. In tenth-largest
goods. goods, textile petroleum goods, engineering chemicals, software, leather products, manufactured Major exports jewellery, include: and
oil, and include: machinery, gems, imports chemicals. Major fertiliser, crude
to petrochemical exports and 2011, 42%. the of and total contribution 2001 to from goods engineering grew Between 14%
has rates world's hourly second was first decade growth 2013 doubled of textile the after more calendar years during century. 21st China economic prior 7.5% of an year.Averaging India largest wage India the exporter 2007, the several rate for than in the its to
Some India's poverty left to 580 have since million Indians classes by million 1985; are middle 431 projected around 2030. number
financial Though ahead several 24th 44th in global in advanced 17th sector, sophistication, sophistication, 51st ranking competitiveness, in banking as innovation, business of the and in 39th market India in economies. ranks of 2010,
United technology outsourcing top destination after of the information 15 based world's of India, as seven States. the the second-most favourable 2009, the is viewed With outsourcing companies in as country
GDP an US$1,723 2010, to in economic 2016. estimated 1991, in per began, from US$329 steadily market, the US$1,265 consumer by India's nominal in increased expected by world's eleventh-largest, capita to liberalisation growth, fifth-largest 2030.Driven when India's to become is
is to expected grow US$2,358 by to 2020. It
lower remain of those in is it developing other remained has countries to Malaysia, near However, and so Asian expected Sri than Philippines, future. Indonesia, the and Lanka, like Thailand,
Nepal, is others. Bangladesh, per Pakistan, capita and than Its GDP Afghanistan higher
2045. India's States According by PricewaterhouseCoopers could parity that a at purchasing overtake power the United (PwC) of report, 2011 to GDP
of expected During decades, until the 8%, making 2050. to at it fastest-growing potentially major GDP next four world's grow average the Indian economy annualised is an
growth a of of growing and skill factors: middle-class. sector consumer growth young rapidly in engineering working-age education the manufacturing because sustained report by and driven market growing rising highlights The rapidly and the key a growth population; levels;
Delhi the transport public agricultural Bangalore education, created (3rd), of cautions nutrition.According released cities across to Economist to than security, continue on (EIU) health World by 400 comparing must India energy services, four (5th), 160 prices labour of the Unit the products Living was reform, were 2017 (5th) Chennai that, in (8th). of it more and New sector potential, and and and removal infrastructure, public which individual regulations, Mumbai to Bank The Worldwide Cost rural India: development, Report economic its cheapest focus achieve and Intelligence for by
the Indian domestic by and second-fastest by quarter the in and during telecommunication 2009–2010, period added of during world largest 2008–2009. growing, world's increased million become automotive 227 the world's 26% India to after 2017, US the fastest-growing, smartphone industry, industry, after surpassed during market second 36% the third 2010–2011, China.The India's the exports sales the subscribers
India's to power generate which 42 300 of is is electrical capacity gigawatts, renewable. gigawatts
pharmaceutical in 2.8 revenues 26% of merchandise 7.5% industry industry GDP, professionals, equalling India of India's US$100 to significant Indian exports.The industry. the Indian of is the IT markets close 2011, pharmaceutical emerging the global generated the million billion among and contributed employed At end for
to by reach Indian expected is market billion 2020. The $48.5 pharmaceutical
60% India's & of spending R D industry. biopharmaceutical the constitutes
is among in the the world. India top biotech destinations 12
2013 by ₹235.24 rupees) from billion its exchange The billion rates). industry to grew at 15.1% increasing (US$3.94 (Indian ₹204.4 in revenues 2012–2013, billion Indian June biotech
Despite continues growth socio-economic face India decades, economic challenges. to during recent
number In the people below day. poverty of living the 2006, World US$1.25 per of contained India largest international line Bank's
proportion 2005. in 60% to 42% from in decreased The 1981
World Bank's line, poverty revised the 2011. it Under was later 21% in
India's 30.7% are age five of underweight. of children under the
Organization report of Agriculture is and in undernourished. 2015, According Food population 15% the a to
there Free begging, to slavery, modern labour, forced million Meal and estimated 18.3 of child bonded an report the 2016 population, among Mid-Day lower 1.4% Walk these in living attempts to The Scheme in forms such trafficking, the people as or human labour, a Foundation of others. were rates.According India,
between grown: the richest 12.6 economic 2011 net child per-capita According 1991, to million decline state poorest. labourers of 2.6 was the 3.2 has census, 2007 million the times 10.1 of from that domestic India's product the there in a were 2001.Since consistently inequality in the in million states country, of states
India Corruption to have decreased. is perceived in
with a Index, the in to 100, 2018 Perceptions India out 41 from in 85th of 2014. an 180 of out improvement According 78th of Corruption countries score ranked
4,500 than Indian years. cultural more history spans
foundations today, c. the such were period dhárma, mythology, established. kárma, BCE), the beliefs and still theology were 1700 philosophy, yóga, as Hindu many and and which laid, practices and Vedic 500 literature – During (c. of mokṣa, exist
its Jainism Buddhism, is among the major India diversity, for nation's Hinduism, Islam, notable Christianity, religions. with religious and Sikhism,
philosophy. Bhakti the Yoga The Hinduism, historical movement, of of thought, has the Buddhist by schools and predominant Sutras, including the various shaped by those been Upanishads, religion,
Taj styles. architecture, architecture, the of local ancient traditions Mughal with Mahal, Indian imported Indian South including of architecture, works and Much blends other
also flavours. Vernacular regional is architecture its in
reflect literally laws and and human shastra, it employs perceived to or alignments Mamuni to constructs. ascribed of precise how the "science construction" cosmic "architecture" geometry Mayan, nature of directional Vastu explores affect dwellings;
foundational Vastu-Purusha Shastras, is square basic texts by influenced the applied the that Hindu in of the mythological a it form a "absolute". whose temple is Shilpa As embodied architecture, series mandala,
The and List world's in "the heritage". his World Muslim the of Agra Shah Jahan universally the been art 1648 and built Heritage of of admired India wife, memory in as has 1631 between orders of UNESCO in jewel of the masterpieces Emperor Mahal, by in Taj described one
late on drew architecture, British 19th CE, BCE in was architecture.The the the in Indo-Islamic in India, by language. earliest century, 1500 between Sanskrit Indo-Saracenic and developed literature 1200 the composed Revival
and the 1500 Rigveda (c. and Abhijñānaśākuntalam (c. (c. CE) – literature epics: Sanskrit later); century 5th other (The Kālidāsa works 400 Major of 1200 BCE poetry. (c. Ramayana and 300 the Śakuntalā, include of 400 Recognition – BCE Mahābhārata dramas of Mahākāvya and the CE) BCE BCE),
– Sangam BCE (c. 300 473 of the earliest consisting 600 In 2,381 poets, poems, BCE) Tamil the literature work. is by literature, composed
and drastic to of Guru because of change the like of 14th the From literary India's centuries, traditions Kabīr, period went devotional poets the Tulsīdās, 18th a emergence through Nānak.
differed period medieval expression; significantly wide This by from of spectrum a consequence, literary works and traditions. Indian thought and a classical characterised was as varied
in the took century, and descriptions. 19th In a new interest social psychological questions writers Indian
literature by of of the Tagore, and Indian works who 20th century, a influenced novelist Literature. poet was the Rabindranath recipient Nobel Bengali In the was Prize in the
various regional Indian and over styles. music traditions ranges
folk various and northern their and offshoots: the Carnatic genres two southern Classical Hindustani encompasses music schools.
of is form and syncretic latter. include forms folk a music; the of tradition filmi popular Regionalised the well-known the bauls
features also Indian forms. classical folk diverse dance and
dances West Assam, the Jharkhand, and Gujarat, the of Bengal, Maharashtra. are: Odisha of folk Jhumair Punjab, dandiya Rajasthan, garba bihu the of ghoomar the of and of chhau bhangra better-known the Among lavani and and of
have Drama. accorded been narrative of and forms dance India's mythological National many by and Eight with status dance forms, Music, Dance, Academy classical elements,
of Nadu, are: Manipur, the These kathak Uttar Odisha, the of and of of of Assam. Tamil Kerala, and odissi Pradesh, of state of Pradesh, sattriya kathakali bharatanatyam manipuri of Andhra mohiniyattam kuchipudi
in or Theatre written improvised melds India dialogue. dance, music, and
of Gujarat, Andhra or the borrowing Hindu Bengal, Maharashtra, of ramlila Nadu, also Often jatra and nautanki and Tamil the of India, the West of terukkuttu events, tamasha of but theatre and of yakshagana mythology, North burrakatha Pradesh, romances Indian from Karnataka. the political on based of includes: social medieval bhavai
India. institute of Culture, Ministry Delhi is (NSD) a It the under organisation that India at situated Drama the School theatre Government autonomous is of training has National an of New
the film cinema. Indian The world's industry most-watched produces
Gujarati, Punjabi, and exist Kannada, traditions the Bengali, Hindi, Bhojpuri, Marathi, Telugu languages. Malayalam, cinematic Odia, regional in Assamese, Established Tamil,
the of film industries than 36% a of industry and more the as decades. representing (Bollywood) in South 43% which largest two 1959 and India sector Tamil expanded represent state-run in Indian office medium The for Hindi Telugu communication combined.Television began revenue, box language followed film slowly by is broadcasting
in broadcast on monopoly state television the The 1990s. ended
increasingly satellite of have culture Since then, popular the Indian shaped channels society.
are media over (37 most press consumers, indicate cable satellite or million). estimates forms (350 million television as connections as India; media million 2012 Today, penetrative 462 million) the 554 (156 TV mass to other with such in there of internet million), that compared of industry or radio is the
by is sometimes Indian society defined social Traditional hierarchy.
the of system the embodies the in caste restrictions of subcontinent. and Indian Indian much many found social stratification The social
defined groups, "castes". Social are as endogamous classes jātis, hereditary termed by thousands or of often
enacted and anti-discriminatory has in illegal 1947 untouchability India to other declared be laws social welfare since and initiatives.
At and its in values norm in Indian caste-related joint in the lost patriarchal and the urban tradition, identification pretty importance.Family becoming India, much leading important been or common are have families companies, international areas. though urban nuclear in are the Indian families multi-generational has in workplace India,
elders. arranged marriages majority of with their Indians, family or their have parents other consent, their overwhelming An by
the divorce. divorce is a to life, low, extremely be one than thought rate marriages thousand is with in in Marriage ending less and for
rural areas; 18, Child are especially marriages is their women common, reaching legal many in marriageable wed which before age.
missing period ratios; from 63 infanticide 20 population to million 2014, India, in skewed the period, quadrupled female of and during 15 growth the gender and in constituting the percent have in of than created women the number Female million ending lately country foeticide, in 50-year same faster female the electorate. India's
million an are do government care. Indian to study, Accord adequate and unwanted an not receive additional 21 girls
patriarchal sex-selective boys practice result India, for of government on Despite remains in the a a ban a the society. in preference commonplace foeticide,
payment illegal, widespread remains across lines. of The although class dowry,
religious burning, are from mostly despite bride are Indian anti-dowry stringent festivals origin. on rise, the Deaths resulting from laws.Many dowry, in
Chaturthi, Thai Pongal, Diwali, Eid and Bakr-Id, Durga Ganesh Holi, Christmas, known best Vaisakhi. include: ul-Fitr, The Puja,
and both ancient modern worn dress from for of until widely advent most The the traditional in India, times times, was draped. women men,
single a and spanning long piece lower long, it the the took eventually form For women body. famously sari, cloth, of a width six yards of of
around end, body, tied around sari shoulder. waist and knotted over is and the the at lower the one The wrapped then
the been form, veil. has head, sometimes used face, a more the and In modern cover to it as its
lower-body shorter been serves the which Indian an upper choli, similar primary a contours, as garment, to sari's cover with with over as fastening, combined has waist Indian the cloth, tucked or the petticoat, worn men, is length underskirt, an It and blouse, to the passing the of has also in It obscure serving the commonly secure a garment. but upper-body midriff.For or the more dhoti, served body's shoulder, end, for now band and
It the is waist around and wrapped. too tied
the left lower the wrapped tucked upper the free. it end the around lower south waistband, is in India, body, usually In
tucked before it being in at around to back. In northern once brought also leg legs wrapped each the up through India, in addition, the is be
involve off head or are worn a the or (a to upper as sexes the the by part sun the women or a and forms of around apparel stitching the shawl during turban the cover weather, to tailoring for it) colder head, body covering traditional both chaddar keep framing (a or or veil Other worn tradition, cold). a no by pagri of the worn a or large scarf that
was in of unstitched. millennium the entirely people the beginning ordinary of Until first CE, the India dress
elite cut the Asia, Central of the 48 CE, The the circa in Asian Kushans sewn favoured in of from popularised India. style by and Central garments northern arrival
of until stitched the Muslim rule use range India not in and the was became first with then it However, their Delhi the clothes Empire, widespread. was established, sultanate Mughal grew that significantly and more
the establishing times as and forms themselves now and kurta of India kameez. and shalwars garments northern the the early-modern medieval worn tunics are: commonly well in as gradually during pyjamas trousers, both Among and various
waist continuous longer garments much wide the at but to cuffed India, narrow southern In are however, see bottom. were a atypically to traditional the use.Shalwars draped
pleated causes become them elastic held which up drawstring waist. around by or the are a to belt, They
pants the on bias, narrow, they cut called wide or be can they baggy, churidars. are in and can which be The case quite
is long shirt The kameez tunic. a or
the are gives wearer seams freedom side open of below waist-line,), which movement. the The greater left
and modern older kameez to flat; cuts; The use sleeves. cut traditional kameez likely are is European-inspired kameez straight more set-in usually have
as a collarless; Mandarin-collar, or kurta. case, design garment in collar, a the latter The is be its may may women's it a have to kameez European-style similar a
tunics, in formal them evolved Central traces everyday a kameez use roots which well women, of kurta, the Muslim shalwar especially stylistically the for wear as Asian in has to making region.A as regional for India gradually as spread, Punjab At style, first occasions. nomadic by its worn garment a
typically plain silk; wearer's or torso, It be knees. tight or falling below cotton such it is loose or or the in as with is embroidered made somewhere of and the decoration, above chikan; worn either can traditionally it just
of less collars traditional over are have churidars, be kurta worn it pyjamas, is a hemmed wrist and and to standing ordinary loose by not the can sleeves be fashions without popular; collarless, it years, women; shalwars, but a 50 the in The India. both traditionally fall great worn last traditionally the though kurta the deal men or jeans.In cuffed; ends changed narrowing, can increasingly over
is for in formal Increasingly, into settings transformed northern longer wear, of the sari India, instead apparel the urban one in everyday no occasions.
traditional worn by who is rarely kameez shalwar churidars younger women, favour jeans. or The
by to The and the men young worn are usually fall plain. seldom shins kurtas
sports jackets conditioning ubiquitous In air to settings, men wear allows year-round. white-collar office
sherwanis groom weddings short groomsmen jackets, classes the bandgala, pants, often occasions, Nehru and wear upper or with middle- in men sporting formal with the and churidars. and and his For
brocaded with dhoti, to seldom of to liturgical the the millions, reduced now, the garment and cities, Indian seen India, border, to khadi of the Gandhi the is wearing once priests. which of universal bring Hindu the The in vestments handwoven Hindu allowed of homespun form in nationalism
regional variety consists cuisine wide traditional cuisines. Indian of a and of
range using these from groups, soil in occupations, and fruit. spices, substantially cuisines vegetables, other, herbs, the climate, type, vary available of and diversity ethnic culture, locally each Given
Hindu foodways Indian have choices by in cultural particular influenced and traditions. religion, been
also and of Portuguese that shores, particularly Islamic have shaped arrival the rule. by of India's They the British rule, the been southwestern Mughals, on by by
three biryani; vindaloo; curry. reflected, tiffin in of the pilaf and dishes are and Railway influences the These the mutton the respectively, and
had notably, peppers, tomato, potato, Earlier, the Columbian pineapples, brought and exchange most chilli India. the the to maize, guavas, nuts, cashew peanuts,
Each became of use. staples
in variation catalyst grown of Age spice India monsoons, across of Europe's in associated times, to a Discovery.The between regions their and strongly rainfall. trade for was Europe their and choice, India, cereals planting, India's regions the In timing correspond of the and the turn,
firmly dependence division place cereal determined In the general, their by of as India, arrival irrigation. of before in was artificial the broad in rain, zones on
regions of in with cereal typical cooked complemented moderate northern rainfall, as water, Deccan a India's a the and Rajasthan.The traditionally rainfall high in of the wheat Indian millet in western coast, and the of which flavourful of in in is rainfall, Plateau like plain has been and grown and regions low dishes. northeast foundation requires in Rice, of plains, such on lot fashion, regions savoury meal a
by coriander, spices may commonly ginger that others with with spiced and The cardamon discerningly cumin, combination lentils, turmeric, and more a informed as vegetables conventions. includes culinary of pulses latter also and cinnamon, garlic, include but
actual a for vegetables. of and simultaneous, bowls, act small In this cooked mixing—for such lentils—or example an whether of rice the folding the by bread—around actual in two accompaniments, as than piecemeal, eating, a place of often as cooked the ingestion cereal, form ones, the the in the rather central one—such platter, or in takes for and flavourful each meal, with peripheral the other, of thali, of representation mental
a of of is of of each geographical notable cuisines, Indian existence number food the and its the feature feature A adherents. histories vegetarian of cultural a distinctive
population, religious to in of ahimsa, and of southern prevalence or many life especially in Jains. factor segment is Upanishadic India, Hinduism, have a history, the a among of been belt and in notable especially Gujarat, Hindi-speaking Jainism, early north-central toward vegetarianism in violence all well forms Buddhism appearance orders the the of India, as Hindu The thought as avoidance Indian of among India's of
low diet proportional these of felt contributes of and in India. discomfort consumption to overall strong groups, at meat, meat thoughts Among to eating is the
substantially of in years traditions the the significant capita dietary last growth, millennium, the during techniques India its have growth.In contributed the China, increased cooking preferred than consumption per in meat into Empire. has economic consumption accompanying of increased to strong its protein becoming import India Mughal animal rather economic higher which dairy, the form meat, occurred Unlike of most
as such into in regions and northwest. Mughal was developed interim that to its earlier to it during meat from spread as much dishes, India marinating rule had of and from the spread such cooking Abbasid of the India northern The the Central caliphate, yogurt, rice however, during pilaf, cultivation West in the techniques Asia;
to Persia, garlic, began the spices simple of marinade yogurt almonds, and be in To onions, added India.
biryani, many dining slow cooking Agra, its meat, sauteed what of layered feature which had the world Islamic fine tightly, the has to cooked parts to was southwest sealed Persian for in Indian with Mughal grain, become a capital, famous today produce according technique, to and another alternately of the of in Rice the and become cooked the grown pot India. festive the partially
of and internationally, partially restaurants in in cuisine. Indian been served by urban In Punjabi concealed north has food of dominance India, the food the diversity
from Punjab by response and the large had who an part region India, been the by was 1947 refugees. among India This displaced arrived partition caused in entrepreneurial people of in had as
from Punjab of Asia—dates and The region, rural the Indian the Muslims, this tandoor but oven, which which for period. been had used with in Delhi originally is baking traditionally chicken—cooked to tandoori in bread cuisine the especially the Central identification among
India, gilli-danda. In such traditional kho indigenous remain as kho, kabaddi, and pehlwani popular, sports fairly several
of silambam, as marma such the Asian India. musti arts, forms and martial Some yuddha, earliest of adi, kalarippayattu, in originated
to originated of number widespread with the have rise the India grandmasters. regaining as Indian Chess, chaturaṅga, in is popularity held in commonly
early which increasingly derives, marble other players Indian team 2010s Akbar.The from by country. the parcheesi Pachisi, court giant Indian the popular Davis Cup in tennis and have a in played by on the improved garnered made results tennis was
and sports, at India the Shooting several shooting in Games. Olympics, medals Championships, comparatively the the a has has and Commonwealth strong World won presence
internationally top-ranked in (Saina the Sindhu of have badminton P which succeeded world), the sports are and badminton Other female two Indians wrestling. Nehwal in boxing, include V players and
Tamil and is Kerala, Nadu, Bengal, West states. north-eastern in Goa, the popular Football
popular the India. is Cricket in sport most
hosted world Cricket leagues.India Premier 1982 or Commonwealth 2011 several U-17 World sports 2010 events: Cup; Asian Trophy; is Champions Major ranks and the domestic the Hockey 2010 sporting most-watched the the among Games; 2003 2006 which 1996, World 1987, in and cricket sixth competitions include co-hosted Afro-Asian and the tournaments; FIFA Cup the the Indian ICC the League, league and Games; 2017 the has all international the Games; Cup. 1951 World
the Mumbai and Delhi the the held Open, international India include Half annually the Chennai events Indian Marathon, Masters. Marathon, in Major sporting
1 discontinued Grand F1 from has featured first Prix but season late calendar in 2011 the since Formula been 2014. The Indian
dominant Games. been country Asian South has the traditionally at India the
won of the Indian where team basketball An example to of out date. dominance this tournaments three the is competition four
India Outline of
Etymology military Overview Demographics relations Geography Foreign Culture History and Biodiversity Economy Politics
of Web Government DirectoryGeneral information Government website "India". of India of India Official Government
Factbook. World The
Intelligence Agency. Central
to BBC for Futures State Indian related from Key Development India from district website UCB block Curlie data village the India News at of India India from India at Atlas GovPubs Forecasts Geographic Libraries International OpenStreetMap India Wikimedia
Africa, Madagascar the Indian include:Along the is of coast straits Zanj Africa, of Ocean Channel mainland separates and located seas, north the the of Madagascar. east Sea while of from bays Marginal gulfs, Mozambique
Bab-el-Mandeb. Red the northern connected Sea, Gulf to Sea the by of the Aden Arabian the is strait of On coast of
Channel from Socotra Gulf the Horn of island the In of Gulf Aden, Africa. is separates Guardafui of located the in and the Tadjoura Djibouti
the Red Gulf of Gulf The northern end in the Aqaba terminates and of Sea of Suez.
via is connected Suez Canal, the Ocean the through artificially Red to Mediterranean The accessible the is Indian Sea Sea. which
by Hormuz. is of Strait connected of the and Gulf The Persian to the the Gulf Sea Arabian Oman
the Persian Arabic In Peninsula. from of Qatar Gulf Bahrain the the Gulf, separates
the of separates end of Gulf the coast Khambat northern India. of Gulf the the Along from located tip while Sea in are and the India, of Laccadive Kutch the in southern Maldives west Gujarat
coast of the India. off Bengal is Bay The east of
while two. Gulf Lanka Mannar from Bridge the separates the Strait Sri Palk Adam's India, of separates The the and
and Bengal the The Bay of the between is Islands. located Andaman Andaman Sea
composed In the Indonesian Seaway Sunda Straits. Indonesia, of and is Malacca, Torres the so-called
large while located Australian constitutes the of The of coast Gulf its southern the Carpentaria Bight Australian of a coast. Great north on part
features Several the Ocean unique. Indian make
atmosphere, of both regionally Warm the Tropical and when the It Pool core climate globally. with the constitutes large-scale interacting which, affects the
Indian the and of export heat blocks prevents Ocean Asia ventilation the thermocline.
Indian the the Current. currents, reversal That strongest including drives Monsoon Somali the in monsoon, large-scale continent Current causes ocean Earth, Indian variations Ocean and of on which the also seasonal
Because of there no circulation the Ocean easterlies. equatorial Walker Indian continuous are
Upwelling the occurs Peninsula the Northern the of in winds and Africa in Hemisphere. the Arabian Horn trade and the Hemisphere of near north Southern
affected a climate The north the Pacific.The of Equatorial by unique is climate. the equator a connection Throughflow is Indonesian monsoon to
until from prevail. until north-east October April; October winds west Strong and south winds blow May from
subcontinent. brings rain the In Arabian Monsoon the Sea, Indian to the violent
summer southern In can Mauritius winds near the severe. hemisphere, generally are but storms the milder, be
strike When Sea cyclones winds the of Bay the change, the of shores sometimes Bengal. monsoon and the Arabian
rainfall India and the in annual dependent in total occurs past. the many the that Some region during on when the rainfall failed this is civilisations Monsoon of summer so 80% perished
of BC; The strong, weak a dry also 33,500–32,500 and 17,000–15,000 26,000–23,500 phase phase occurred a and Heinrich, pre-historically, phase Dryas. very series Younger events: with BP, weak, variability a BP; corresponding huge has global wet a Summer Monsoon the to Bølling-Allerød, in Indian dramatic
the in The world. ocean Indian the is warmest Ocean
Indian Long-term 0.7 region) during the warm ocean °F) continuous the in at °C a records temperature 1.2 to Ocean, for (33.3 °F) rapid, show (compared °C pool about warming 1901–2012. (34.2
60°S. in Niño strong and of events that Convergence far Ocean.South air frequency in Southeast burning trigger this during human austral the Experiment Ocean Asian from El biomass caused during the the November the as 1999, summer.In to Indian in Intertropical fuel showed that the (also Indian Ocean a Equator as Indian pollution from warming the of as the is Zone Indian reach it greenhouse while October, indicates are at and (or winter, magnitude brown warming, changes South gaining and to Ocean June austral Dipole), Research losing fossil known heat heat cloud) to induced the the March, (20-5°S), and the is that Asia
has global and local both implications scale. This pollution on a
of Indus is in sediment 40% found and fans. Ganges Ocean the the Indian the of
oceanic sediments. continental basins contain to slopes The the adjacent terrigenous mostly
siliceous (roughly sediment high mostly of south non-stratified and the ocean in latitude) polar 50° front is The biologic productivity by of south oozes. dominated composed
rate.The young ocean therefore bare mainly Ridge Indian is for to by relatively currents are ocean's spreading its and the the Near the three except controlled due floor ultra-slow monsoon. Southwest major sediment, mid-ocean of ridges the
Two pattern. gyres, and northern constitute Current anticlockwise south of and dominant moving (including flowing flow one large hemisphere Return the clockwise equator the Agulhas Agulhas one the Current), the in
of terraces Bengal Fan, winter the monsoon however, slope world, north periods rift 30°S During and the are and reversed valleys. circulation Indian the the largest weakened the areas largest the (November–February), of between transitional the and winter Fan and and submarine of during Indus contains Ocean winds is monsoons.The fans
water Indian the 11 inflow the The deep (CDW). Water which of Circumpolar Ocean of into from is Sv, comes most Deep
Crozet 30°S. crosses and basins Southwest The the and the CDW at Madagascar Indian the enters Ocean Indian through Ridge
by Basin itself, the branch boundary it the Water. is CDW the met western before In becomes Mascarene North re-circulated a deep of a Deep Indian current
is north where and partly by Ocean is Indian This Somali Rossby it is an most mixed Basin in of extension blocked eastern the Ridge. the in waves.Water the of flows circulation water flows produced by by whilst 90°E Southeast Anticyclonic which oscillating Gyre, the Subtropical Ridge Basin the dominated clockwise into Indian flow the Mascarene the
South south cells Ridge of Indian Madagascar the separates and Africa. off Madagascar Southwest three and
(6,600–9,800 ft) m of Atlantic continental Indian flows the Africa Ocean reaches the south of Deep Water along 2,000–3,000 at eastern a north Africa. North into of and depth slope
Deeper surface latitude temperature NADW, across °F) from it Indian Antarctic °C Edward is south °F), Prince Fracture Bottom flows of Basin Basin east. where Channel (13,000 Water Agulhas °C Southwest the (82 and Ridge, channels minimum m the 28 into ft)) deep 22 exceeding to Zone.North to Enderby than (<4,000 (72 in Mozambique continues from 20° the the
water Bengal Ocean. half the temperatures of more latitude, (2,950 Bay quickly.The Southward to cu than contributes of mi)) of runoff km3 (710 south Indian 40° the drop
summer, Equator flows fresher also across Arabian the Indonesian the the Sea runoff mixes with Throughflow. seawater from Mainly in into but where it south this
Ocean.Sea freshwater in evaporation Arabian Indian highest exceeds PSU) mixed South joins salinity Sea the precipitation southern This (more Equatorial than Current because there. is the the surface in 36 tropical
the than Sea PSU. drops Arabian Southeast to salinity In less 34
33 in is the of and river Bay because of the PSU) It precipitation. (c. runoff Bengal lowest
lower Throughflow precipitation along results west The (34 the PSU) coast. Indonesian in Sumatran and salinity
(1.9 of patch September Arabian variation water saltier from miles). westerly square to April.An garbage India Indian covering transportation million Sea the kilometres was the from square million January 2010 Bengal results the in East of by to at in to Sea Arabian Bay 5 in Ocean discovered June and from least to Coastal eastward Current transport the Monsoonal
down garbage Australia of a that Riding vortex this Africa, years, in circulates the ocean centre debris from indefinitely gyre. the the period the Mozambique six constantly of to gets stuck back the and except in Gyre, southern Channel, for plastic Indian Ocean Australia of to
over the patch according decrease to Indian several study, to centuries. decades after The in in garbage completely Ocean a size will, 2012 vanish
to reach similar north to south Atlantic far system the probably in of Indian latitude, however, caused as than where two the but 55° the will in are 45°S. North amphidromes up icebergs Pacific less several Pacific.There global the wave by opposite patches garbage the Over Rossby Ocean, accumulate propagation.Icebergs millennia, drift as of rotation in
from 2012 retreating was the anthropogenic Indian level. 24 rise of freshwater the ocean 1960s, global 2004 in Ocean of causes in of the with sea combined loss and between ice iceberg contributions The a volume land warming Gt.Since global
in levels pattern gases. caused in the Sea of likely decreases, Indian Ocean the tropical Ocean too, a it increases level where by Indian south rising greenhouse except most
of largest phytoplankton Among concentration oceans, blooms the due in the Indian the strong winds. hosts Ocean to tropical western of the summer, monsoon one
introduces upper where coastal upwelling, nutrients a for The leads sufficient to phytoplankton and which the forcing ocean strong zones light and into wind is photosynthesis available open monsoonal production.
the larger marine phytoplankton support ecosystem, the food These and the of the as blooms marine eventually species. fish web, base
Ocean catch. Indian of for economically The the share tuna accounts valuable most the second largest
and the countries fish and importance of consumption great growing domestic to are bordering for export. It's
ocean and taking exploit are mainly Japan, the from Korea, marine Fishing Taiwan the also and temperatures a indicates on for fleets ecosystem. Ocean, Russia, that shrimp tuna.Research toll Indian South increasing
decades. indicates in Indian in A 20% the marine on a past six study during phytoplankton up Indian Ocean, of to the the the plankton Ocean in decline the changes
due Northwest of Shelf. Ocean warming during half Australian Coastal adding with the industrial to open Sea, mostly the Shelf, to and Australian and Bay Australian Thailand, vulnerable ecosystems: ocean of is declined turtles: Arabian Indian The Agulhas Somali past further and 80% Current, Bengal, and species.Endangered marine mammals rates 50–90% catch includes of also nine ocean Central fisheries, Sea, stress the tuna Gulf fish century, marine have the increased West Shelf, Southwest Red the large Current,
c. reefs Coral cover
sq 200,000 km2 mi). (77,000
(1,200 246 3,000 mi) The of and and coasts the Ocean sq beaches intertidal km2 includes larger Indian zones covering estuaries.
but important. areas are small Upwelling
5,000–10,000 life. (1,900–3,900 such and Dunaliella covers in this km2 for bird salina, sq between environment, species important as mi) and adapted are to salina Artemia The hypersaline India salterns
grass fish. sea and mangrove Coral most of — of the 20 the are reefs, coastal Indian beds, tones produce forests ecosystems per productive kilometre Ocean areas square
however, several while coral Indian in effective areas, half and which populations region, 42,500 exceeding urbanised sea are also almost spreads habitat, bleaching.Mangroves mangrove square often of techniques of the per become (16,400 (31,268 km2 levels Indonesia, is and mangroves mi) mi) thousand world's of sq people Ocean 50% km2 with in or Ocean. covers destructive in kilometre more temperature Indian in beyond fishing located 80,984 the surface being sq increase sustainable These or often
Indian adapted where and Indian Africa limpet, in hydrothermal was snail, "giant animal identified discovered discovered loss 2016 scaleworm a in its suffers snail, six species late is to Mangroves off have region wide at was and the polychaete in it crab, the habitat.In in 1990s worm.The the new a and of in a Sulawesi Indonesian a the Southwest a biggest the vents the Ocean habitats coelacanth South 1930s also a but it species, West another Indian Indonesia. "Hoff" Indian peltospirid" Ocean of off its originated coelacanth, Island, were whelk-like a Ridge: Ocean range
in have coelacanths found extant the Most been Comoros.
they extinct from though both lobe-finned from mya) Devonian order (410 are morphologically ancestors. 66 represent an their Devonian fishes and distinct mya, of the Early Although species known
shallow, inhabit adapted waters. — evolved deep evolved of gills for marine to waters environments Over lungs into for different coelacanths brackish adapted millions years,
part of active Ocean youngest the worldwide system Indian that As of the spreading ridges. oceans, major the ridges of has are mid-ocean the
separating separating Indian from separating African Southeast Antarctic Rodrigues the Ridge, Plate; the African the In the meet the from Plate Point with including spreading Plate. Indian Plate the the Indian Plate Plate; Antarctic Triple Ridge Southwest Ocean Central Indian Australian Ridge, from Carlsberg the and Indian the the at ridges Ridge the these the
Ridge Central by The Zone. intercepted Indian Fracture Owen is the
Indian cannot that Plate, the by definition zones. it diffuse correct; of Capricorn 1990s, become Australian three Plate however, — of Indo-Australian Since late separated the the this and traditional plates Plate boundary clear the — consists be has Plate, it
East series hotspots 6,000 Pakistan.A pass ridges only the Iran being and Ocean. Plate trenches by mi)-long the (3,700 and (560 by 20 the of chains seamount the produced 900 km Since and divided African Trench Sunda Nubian Makran and the into Indian Trench African the System two between Ma the Java km mi)-long Trench the Java Ocean: Rift and over south is of are plates.There in Indian Somalia
the Mascarene Plateau East the connects million and Traps hotspot to Kerguelen Edward to the Plateau Deccan possibly hotspot Ridge. 70–40 Ridge Chagos-Laccadive million Ninety connects (100–70 Réunion The north-western and Ridge East India; Kerguelen Islands Rajmahal in ago) years and Eighty Five Réunion (active the years the the Prince the ago) Kerguelen India; Islands ago) to million the the Marion and north-eastern in connects hotspot (100–35 years Traps
Atlantic above.There still and the ridges active than have broken Ocean hotspot the by the fewer been These spreading in Pacific. mentioned are Indian seamounts tracks in
located of 3,000 of deeper west typically and 55°S north and These than m (9,800 are ft) 80°E.
in far located spreading these away some from ridges. but originated are now Most ridges at basins
Indian Indian Indian long, Indian the Ridge, Southwest Broken Ridge, 90°E Ridge, Carlsberg Ridge, form Central ranges very Ridge, Ridge, Indiaman Ocean seamounts, Ridge, of and Ridge. The the East Southeast Ridge, of Chagos-Laccadive Madagascar ridges sometimes Ridge, including 85°E
major began Mascarene and Indian of opening shallow two c. the Plateau the Agulhas are areas.The Ocean The Plateau
from when separated Gondwana. Africa Ma East 156
135–125 Subcontinent 118–84 to Ocean Tethys the close began the opened separate north The India as of and to Ocean Ma behind Indian it. began from Indian Australia-Antarctica Ma
whereas connected together and people the the since of ancient with roles incognitum. Ocean, or has the barriers Indian have Atlantic Mediterranean, had times, The Pacific mare
however, Indian colonial largely and history on has the written the Ocean, of availability written sources been Eurocentric of dependent from the The era.
an recently the but is colonial/modern Islamic This more by period divided of an not the periods exists is are British often modern much into World", to often an emerged subsequent established. period; "Atlantic similar and and World" Dutch, Ocean "Indian subdivided early history into and followed that ancient well periods.A (IOW), Portuguese, of concept
The and to monsoon and IOW global China, Mesopotamia. the is, India, economy" the sometimes as "first was linked Asia, nevertheless, on referred which based
European cultures, is routes. of ethnical independently history of independent and century dominance.The It the Mediterranean Indian and from Atlantic European and diverse Ocean in the remained shipping groups, largely colonial developed natural until trade them 19th resources, unique global from a mix the
and in periods It Cold powers. and emergence has regional War beginning instability, undergone the importance recently in of grew most China with of the 1970s it after India as 1960s and the political
erectus fossils other and of pre-H. Pleistocene Homo
similar Europe, homonin to in heidelbergensis India. fossils, have in H. been found sapiens
catastrophe theory, the c. a supereruption According to Toba
into theory covered of Africa Lake spread and at India mainland Homo Out sapiens lineages archaic Toba, wiped out years from humans one Eurasia. in ago of ashes Southeast volcanic or such Sumatra, Asia.The more that Africa states and 74000 with India
Southern southern advocates Asia. Peninsula coasts humans Dispersal and The the the modern instead spread hypothesis or that Coastal more along of Arabic recent
mtDNA Late event (11,000 hypothesis Pleistocene dispersal by the supported ago). is during reveals a years rapid This which research
northern intermittently 0.7–4.0 Indian along the per estuary (0.43–2.49 mi) This however, from years ago coastal of Ocean the perimetre of km East rate and occurred year. in began Africa at estuary 75,000 dispersal, to
migrating to Sunda from Australia). resulted (Southeast modern Sahul eventually Asia over Wallacea in humans to It
long then, the had Since inhabited Ocean migration waves before people littoral of have and, resettled first the been clearly, emerged. civilisations Indian
littoral six its East 5000–6000 interlinked Indian distinct ago Australia; Middle c. began Ocean had the Ocean: globalisation centres neighbours.Food South the to around Indian Malay Subcontinent, cultural East, Africa, the and Asia, each evolved Indian the East on years World, the
ago. years 4.000
India in Harappan hyacinth cowpea, — Five the sorghum, way (2000–1700 their somehow pearl millet, crops finger BCE). to African — millet, during found Late and bean Gujarat
and slaves. tortoise into they Ocean first Gujarati merchants the the Indian of evolved such goods shells, traded as ivory, African as explorers
cattle, is the zebu although way chicken from Africa, found Broomcorn its to and disputed. Asia Central millet together with timing exact
to 2000 Egypt, Around BCE Asia, in both black small appears albeit pepper sesame, in native quantities. and
time Asia emigrates house to rat the and Around the same black the from Egypt. mouse
and have 2900 Africa Ocean 3000 7400 reached coast of ago.At struck the eleven Banana tsunamis ago. around between prehistoric Indonesia years years least Indian
from sand Aceh have preceding Trench. tsunamis the these that in Sunda megathrusts of series 2000 the in in years of more century between region, minor concluded a over beds periods than tsunamis caves varied dormant Analysing intervals scientists to the
likely Tabban occurred one a major 536 period.A as in of CE. for Burckle Kanmare in Carpentaria risk is argued future in 2800 in Indian a large-scale in of Ocean group such dormant the the Australia Gulf impact the two the 2004 long have in have scientists the followed southern northern Although the that Ocean: is tsunamis megathrust Indian events the in BCE high, by and craters Crater to and be
southern impacts, the Australian argue, in the Madagascar these team in Chevron and and Evidences dunes micro-ejecta are for gulf.
sea and caused ft) (28 45 suggest Geological level evidences the by impacts (673 mi) tsunamis inland. above m km these 205 reached
events have changes. perhaps even human contributed settlements impact disrupted and major climate must to The
trade; Ocean least date exchange Indian seven maritime years. of and the thousand The is marked probably history at by commercial cultural back
Human culture on Persian and the the to spread cultures and of early always the Gulf. Mediterranean of was Ocean Indian the linked shores
Before c.
example, was 2000 c. other; in were shores to each bronze, cultures only however, its on developed for tied BCE, loosely Mesopotamia
before uncommon BCE 1800 3000 in BCE. Egypt but remained
margins independent, this littoral network. an During all-embracing its communications into along evolved short-distance period, oversea
Red regional of network the civilisation in exchange début this Gulf, not a and Sea. was of of Persian The achievement the but and local centralised Sea, the advanced Arabian or
found exchange Sherds this at Ubaid present-day and trading the have BCE) been of traces of western in Bahrain; Mesopotamia. between Dilmun, (2500–500 pottery centre Gulf
boats) and Sumerians (used The reed traded copper, onions, stone, tin, and for dates, bitumen for timber, grain, pearls. pottery,
(modern-day vessels Sea, of Civilisation one explored Gulf goods the (2600–1900 in millennia Red Phoenicians the India) trade and the by the BCE) Indus in Coast-bound and subcontinent routes Indian two and Persian Valley BCE. transported Northwest during was main and Pakistan last Egypt.The between the Antiquity, Egyptians
working for king journey Greek Darius, made century lost and put the India, the explorer the Persian account BCE Scylax of maps now Ocean Indian geographers. on the 6th a In his Greek to Caryanda of
the Arabian circumnavigation the of Indian Alexander 323 to the explore in Greeks ordered Great, Ocean The a the began BCE. conquests Peninsula following who of
the later. era centuries the until the followed best that Ptolemaic Portuguese in of of the resulted the Egypt centuries explorers maps many two During region of the reports
they Arabic world. hunt elephants.The southern for main of desert war Rub' not the Ocean parts the commercial from in for interest the to Ptolemies Africa but military; the isolates Arabic the The the Khali Peninsula was explored al and Indian region
Africa Red and in East Sea to and the the encouraged the region the maritime of linking Gulf India. trade Persian This development
"discovered" was the for however, sailors by The long by monsoon word Hippalus Arabic 1st before being in (from the mawsim, used century. season),
have Red back in of the coastal the between found and is in been Indian wood Akkad India evidence there 2300 the to Sumerian contacts region, dates cities, trade Sea B.C.. and
from archipelagoes century of the Maldive populated central mainland. 2nd were the Indian Indian and The the probably during Ocean, B.C. islands, Laccadive the
of into settled.Periplus before Sea world in merchant Sea, 9th to the had only Greek the shows the the from monsoon of not written Alexandrian but sailors winds. first in about treacherous long region in and and the the the history Red of reefs the islands Erythraean in cursed including likely beyond — They sailors al-Tajir by — the but century Aden an account the the Sulaiman CE, also India islands trade even already Africa appear of guide insights most the were were that century gained Roman gives knowledge
Madagascar The by sailors and shows littoral at by both regularly margins Indian this settlement well-populated traversed the of that were of time. Austronesian Ocean contemporaneous least the being
than earlier been to Indian Ocean's centuries.The Atlantic trade common the Pacific for bordering monsoon opened or the relatively in the areas it Albeit calmer knowledge Ocean waters must oceans. have Indian the
The season, wait months a few powerful ships also the eastwards. return could and easily early west then in monsoons meant sail
Ocean 2nd Madagascar of ancient Cyzicus the the Indian first Eudoxus around BCE, to Indian settle or allowed Greek cross to 1 to in Indonesian the 1st peoples the was CE.In Ocean. cross This century
time. the is to have direct said to around Arabia Hippalus The learnt this fictitious sailor from probably route India
2nd between Roman and relations centuries and the Cheras, Pandyas in Tamil trade During Southern intensive Cholas of India. developed Egypt and 1st AD kingdoms the the
the monsoon people ocean. cross to used above, Indonesian the the Like western sailors the
of describes circa coasts author were of commercial India The the route, the that Horn Erythraean the Sea ports Periplus as Africa well of of unknown CE. traded and along the this on as the 1 commodities various
Opone Mosylon littoral. Among the trading were and Red Sea these settlements on
islands, times. Pacific the the islands the Ocean archipelagos until colonial and Ocean of reached of and were populated most the all of civilization uninhabited Unlike and atolls almost them, flung Polynesians Indian atolls the where far the
in region where island ancient only civilization the Africa, of an coastal were the were civilizations Indian flourished. and the of Central in group parts Asia ancient there states Although the Ocean Maldives numerous
and their their western from ships Maldivians, Lanka merchants dependent took trade century, is spread because ships not the began Islam Indian oceangoing missionaries to along much earlier. on the trade the Current.Arabic mainland were than if the 8th closer, their India, Monsoon of shores to trip, which Ocean annual Indian of Sri rather
Kenya. found 8th–15th A been Swahili the have dating to centuries in stone mosque Shanga,
staple across Africa. Indian gradually a Ocean introduced script and rice the in as Eastern Arabic Trade
annually and to slaves 1700, Muslim estimated African 800 a between 1000 grew c. number merchants an that traded
century, the period the 18th during 1800–1870. 4000 during 3700 and
his voyages Ocean unknown.From the in to 1433 of of on Portuguese eastern became the treasure settled Good trade the have rounded in the several Cape first navigator first Gama before ultimately volume large Indian sail fleets there through European India. to trade of but 1405 Dutch admiral Dynasty Ming 1600 said to Slave Africa.The led is also coastal reaching Ocean, countries Hope 1497 during voyage to occurred the Indian Zheng da and the He East this the of Vasco the around
cities and to he African trade China. to of India Swahili series routes people a lived eastcoast and encountered established The along had the in
Portuguese them, in of onboard coastal and raids the most kidnapped Among their pilots ships.
reach however, pilots, in few Malindi Portuguese were A including who helped Gujarat, gift Swahili a of ruler gifts by a the the the by from local Kenya, to sailor India. rulers,
Portuguese 1500 the colonised along cities coast. the In and expeditions attacked African after
the in Portugal slave in began Indian Índia 16th da Ocean century. the trade Estado established European early when
c. then 1830s, until From the
similar region trading Indian communities brought and Mozambique the Ottoman them. shared as began Selim its the from the Union slaves of in religion conquest Asia exported for slaves the were Egypt the been the 200 unexplored I. 1517 estimated Ocean the Iberian Sultan Ottomans was into Although expansion (1580–1640).The figures the by Empire in Indian Philippines has during same with to from Ocean the under annually
Mājid guide parts Ottomans, Indian conquests; had Vasco East to Muslim in Muslim Gama, to the by Ocean. centuries 17th expansion.The parallel establishment early the Indian known Dutch century increase during in included contemporarily Ocean; Ibn began world; Battuta Company Ottoman discovery rivaled trade in a Ocean such that era quick which there been the geographers had slaves navigator had produced ibn compiled in da India of colonies and nevertheless, the the most navigation working European up Indian of 18th Dutch their mostly Maps 500,000 in in perhaps with to 14th of before Century, volume; the scholars, the the Arab a the 17th as were lead the visited centuries Ahmad the own
some slaves used build Sri the to example, African were fortress Lanka. 4000 For Colombo in
networks Bali neighbouring with supplied c. islands regional and
slaves 100,000–150,000 1620–1830.
East Indonesia slaves established Indian same Company during the carried Coromandel its to in Indian traders Dutch perhaps British 18th and Coast slaves and with centuries.The Chinese was the Indonesia. ship period supplied first from during 17th 250,000 1622 and India
brought The and slaves and but to islands Ocean from also mostly Africa India Indian British exported India. slaves Indonesia the in from
populated the 1721; reached colonised 1735 slaves a Islands, by The 7200 had 133,000 in number some Mascarene in which 1807. and French Mauritius Réunion
almost 567,900–733,200 Parliament all, and exported exported had between 1500 the 1670–1848.In the during 1850 system resulting and islands within captured Europeans clandestine from that trade the 1807 The 1810, a in were Ocean to British the the traded of because developed; same however, slaves slave amount Indian Americas the prohibited Mascarane period. Ocean same in and 336,000–388,000 to in slavery Indian the Islands British slaves
to compared in c. Slave Indian nevertheless, the limited trade Ocean very was,
exported the 12,000,000 slaves across Atlantic.
before Indian poorly Expedition Ocean 1960s. Ocean the Indian early in the the Scientifically, International explored remained
from the 1872–1876 reported south the front. of However, only Challenger polar expedition
Indian deep Ocean. expedition Valdivia made 1898–1899 The the in samples
John Murray shallow-water mainly habitats. In studied the 1930s, Expedition the
sampled deep-water Sri fauna its its Galathea on Lanka The Sea global Swedish and tour Indian Africa sampled South also expedition 1950–1952. 1947–1948 the from to Ocean Danish Deep second Expedition the on
European of sailing East Vityaz also the as vessel Ocean.The of Soviet Canal 1869 Industrial Revolution in in shipping dramatically and The in – ship Suez global the when Indian in trade favour Australia. the the opened trade did in did research research changed importance Asia importance declined
construction of Mediterranean. The the many into introduced canal species non-indigenous the
nomadica) red the and have coast clogged mullet desalination tourism power swarms 1980s goldband of since has fisheries example, the Levantian affected (Upeneus goatfish moluccensis) the scyphozoan barbatus); and along (Rhopilema and jellyfish plants. huge the For replaced (Mullus
to to Suez also economy Plans build likely in but larger in boost 19th the much a new, wider Canal canal the century a announced 2014 in parallel ecological most region much cause area. damage will
French, British. as for were such Mauritius the nodes shipping and islands the Dutch, era, Throughout important colonial
and indenture Africa populated from by Mauritius, India. from an labour slaves became inhabited island,
of The World the end War the end marked colonial era. of II
India. Indian of left in a Mauritius close and descent, Mauritius British ally 1974 The of with population the of 70% became
the Indian acted to Cold the Seychelles, including and the nations destabilise in 1980s, Comoros, regime during Madagascar. the In South African War, Ocean, island several the
Gulf. Persian canal Caspian Sea Union to feared who prevent unrealised access base Diego to and Garcia.Iranrud Soviet Soviet the by d'état, backed-up the between and could Union States Iran threaten U.S. gain the the United intervened a Port is India coup on Louis an plan a in the to by Mauritius and build
Indian era stories settlers. white of African slaves, are Testimonies indentured from the and colonial labourers,
black in this World, is and well Indian Ocean free But, settlers men and labourers. Indian Atlantic less the — was racial as were indentured in between line as slaves while slaves the a there distinct there delineation clear
in and forcefully prisoners, of POWs, Ocean, united. labourers, which a South also the forced to were from different in Cellular Andamans, people merchants, Island prison Robben faiths Jail the exiles, were across camps string There Africa in of Indian
Ocean December therefore, of caused the hit countries by Indian emerged.On 2004 Indian the the by a trend Indian a around 26 tsunamis Ocean 2004 Ocean, islands fourteen the On were creolisation earthquake. of wave of
pirate 236,000 in a m of speeds up deaths.In in exceeding mph), radiated the ocean waves ocean 20 into The (310 ft) the km/h resulted late 2000s hub activity. an (66 estimated height, to and reached 500 at evolved across the
coast the on board, with 777 Western (1,200 a private Indian disappeared international especially off into Boeing region's southwest had Australia. 2014 declined 2013, persons 8 km Airlines and Flight active and patrols, March due 239 from crashed By Indian the the to coast to 2,000 by security on Navy.Malaysian about Ocean steadily 370, mi) southeastern alleged Horn have of the navy is attacks airliner
the aircraft search, of unknown. the are Despite remains of whereabouts an extensive the
the the Strait lanes the with in major the of Asia are percent in Ocean The and percent Hormuz, transits among Ocean 40 and the East, 8 world's Bab considered connecting through and 35 Middle Strait.The the in el-Mandab sea seaborne most Europe of Indian world its percent East of chokepoints, with vital routes provides through passing through Ocean than more percent the Strait Indian strategically Americas. the 80 the oil through trade Malacca the Indian Africa, important sea and with
Indonesia. and petroleum particularly heavy Persian of Gulf from and petroleum products carries the of the fields oil traffic a It
being India, tapped of the Large of offshore Arabia, Australia. reserves in are Iran, and Western Saudi areas hydrocarbons
Ocean. from of comes the production the offshore world's estimated oil An 40% Indian
particularly Indonesia, offshore Beach Thailand. bordering actively Pakistan, Africa, deposits exploited rich placer heavy India, sands countries, and Lanka, by in minerals, South are Sri and
and made Sonadia. several Chinese in Hambantota, Gwadar, Ocean companies have Colombo ports, Indian including investments
a about debate has the investments. implications This sparked these of strategic
String (See Pearls) of
Association islands territories Ocean Southern claims of literature Indian Antarctica Ocean dependent and states List of Ocean sovereign Indian II Ocean Indian Indian List Indian Territorial Naval Indian World ports Ocean of Sea List in the in the War Indian Ocean and harbours Rim Research Indian in Erythraean Ocean Antarctica the Group in Symposium Ocean Ocean of
music with director Zach Merck Interview video
raised of in six close-knit was a youngest and Philadelphia. children, Bacon, born in the family
for the taught architect (1910–2005), elementary school. was Commission.Bacon High Masterman Norwood and for an a who School Julia (née Hilda as Ruth both Bacon his high and City attended liberal director Edmund years middle of was R. an school Holmes; while at served Philadelphia activist, 1916–1991), many mother, His Planning father, executive
University, program age attended Bacon Pennsylvania full in scholarship a won arts theater Scott. five-week Governor's At studied Bucknell under at Glory he at Van the and which a the 1975, School Arts 16, for state-funded to
experience for The Bacon's passion arts. solidified the
In slasher he Friday film the the 13th. 1980, in appeared
and early Some 1982, Boys, Stage Val performed Flux, won Out, stage 1981–1982 Theater, then-unknowns Obie for Broadway in Deuce, Sean season.In made afterward Forty he and Getting of Second debut York's his in their Theatre soon and at his work New Phoenix Slab he with Award Penn included role at his an during Kilmer.
not Steve Barry However, year that that same Diner, alike.Bolstered Daniel Mickey costarring Diner performance and and Rourke, the critics by Guttenberg, – indelible Footloose an – he attention in impression Fenwick garnered it Timothy portrayed moviegoers was starred on he (1984). in Ellen Barkin Bacon Tim until his made film film in Daly, Stern, Levinson's by
parents, that crashes, drug old musicals, crisis, Without a of Corliss mid-life James the on AWOL the includes Belt TIME likened and book Footloose burning, classic to car commenting vigilantism." Cause Richard Rebel Mickey "motifs Bible and the Garland Dean film fatal Rooney/Judy enforcement,
day. at prepare in studied middle a the a teenagers of Bacon the and for role, leaving "Ren named the high as school McCormick" enrolled To transfer before student
reviews Footloose. earned strong for Bacon
of he Diner to image. office success a critical the in period in had Footloose, on-screen roles Bacon's and to led and and shaking typecasting box he portrayed two difficulty similar this
own cast and For slump. experienced, he against either chose the type estimation, next several a that years his films career him by
in Hughes' comedy he another Big following She's and in Baby, John a starred the The year called was 1988, In comedy he Picture. Having
in he 2000, Man. Paul appeared Verhoeven's In Hollow
Firth trois Bacon, a ménage à Lies. Truth depict film, and Where in the Colin their Rachel Blanchard
the ratings rate preferable the director film Bacon than decision and the board MPAA have rather "R". to condemned Egoyan "NC-17" Atom
films to extremely Clint R, and play, roles by Bacon Mystic on."In an terms extremely Sean of the clothes the River. have I Eastwood's that of "I in slide no 2003 Robbins in Penn don't it, get objectionable he are (that) sometimes more with women problem, commented: movie violent, happen their acted with because see people Tim when
for Independent starring Spirit nominated the role received acclaimed was Award. The in playing which for offending and a actor for an parole best (2004), again on pedophile dark he Bacon was Woodsman
He the appeared Desert an production Taking written based by story Chance, Films HBO Strobl, of Colonel eponymous in Michael veteran. American an Lieutenant Storm war on
on HBO February on 2009. premiered The 21, film
Actor Male a or Outstanding Screen role. a Movie Award a for in Miniseries Guild for Globe Award Performance Actors a Golden Bacon by and won Television his
based the Six in his mobile has and in a in concept the roles. the network major advertising for Kingdom, film EE on campaign appeared Beginning various 2012, Bacon United Degrees
a In industry. the became he 2015, spokesperson commercial U.S. for egg
screen linked steps with of Bacon their range covering "Six to in a idea Kevin prolific game titled based handful any be genres, based can his actor Bacon," that, on the of a association diverse career the subject is Hollywood trivia of due another to the of on Bacon. Degrees
name separation. of derives The degrees of six from the game the idea of
data. mathematically can game, meme been networking Bacon the stuck, Database at referenced each embraced Movie Bacon Oracle the charitable based be he a the Internet which and Although Bacon, websites of to initially charities and eventually number forming is people and as proximity Bacon site turn intended social link was in including has to formalized by of upon dismayed the measure initiative other.The to it, SixDegrees.org,
engine, an feature the Bacon. which their actor's is 2012, connected name searching the Number" to whereby In that show will a for followed ways words by actor "Bacon Kevin search to added in Google
longer feature active. is no This
mathematician with co-writing measurement one community, where Erdős. removed a A from paper measures far one mathematics exists how is in similar famous mathematical the Paul the
the who of Erdős etc. This by someone someone means who is co-wrote 1 who done with with himself, an which is 2 him, him, for for 0 Erdős Paul with article someone co-wrote for co-wrote number,
the number, combined Erdős–Bacon sum which form Bacon the the the is of two. number have Erdős to and the People number
band a Bacon The brother, his Brothers Michael. formed called Kevin with
albums. released duo has The six
September Motion contribution with by a of the Inducted star 30: presented Walk Chamber Commerce. Picture him Hollywood of for his Fame to to into 2003,
the Denver 2004: Festival. Received the John Award Cassavetes Film International during
Award the Film the Tribute Phoenix Wing Festival. during 2005: Received Copper
Festival. during International Film Received Rivera the American Barbara Santa 2005: Award the
Broadcast Honored 2010: Award Joel with the by Film the Siegel Association. Critics
the Seattle Festival. 2015: International Achievement in Film Career with by Acting Award the Honored
List motion actors picture of Hollywood stars Fame with Walk of
Bacon Kevin Internet of Off-Broadway the AllMovie Database Bacon Database Kevin Kevin Bacon on Bacon IMDb at Bacon Broadway at at Kevin Oracle the Internet
John influenced economist output Keynesian about named the KAYN-zee-ən; spending economics the by Keynes) how (total in macroeconomic ( aggregate economy). Keynesianism, Maynard sometimes for economic are demand strongly theories is various
equal of economy. In aggregate demand necessarily the view, productive not the the capacity does Keynesian
of influenced is factors. Instead, it by a host
According Depression the of employment, Money. the and production, his affecting 1936 after General productive Keynes, book, developed The erratically, of by the and in Keynes Theory Great sometimes the Employment, from capacity economics Interest during inflation.Keynesian ideas to presented behaves and economy
to aggregate the was economics preceded supply-focused that book. stark a approach his contrast classical Keynes'
claim economic of work topic, his schools Keynes's legacy. thought a several is Interpreting and contentious
the nations the the Great economics economic II, expansion served in as Depression, the (1945–1973). part of the later War post-war economic standard Keynesian World and developed model during
stagflation It and oil following some lost of resulting the the 1970s. shock influence
part new as becoming neoclassical was economics, economics synthesis. later Keynesian Keynesian New contemporary of the redeveloped
unstable. thought.Keynesian volatile caused and of that of demand argue aggregate interest is 2007–2008 generally of in financial the a The economists popular crisis advent Keynesian resurgence
and can be often experiences mitigated a is high), macroeconomic low) (when the propose and demand is inflation economic economic by that recessions economy responses. in form market They inefficient (when demand outcomes of policy that these
policy the and over can cycle. central particular, business fiscal bank government the stabilize output policy In monetary the by actions help by actions
active an economy – recessions generally private a market during role for depressions. intervention government but predominantly sector, Keynesian economists with and advocate
factors a to as the applying whole. of is economy study Macroeconomics an the
real interest overall income/output level the Influential of measured of the equivalently, rate, terms). economic the employment (or and in price factors level, include
equation equilibrium of each whose tradition single stated split single equilibrium markets, a the classical to variable. be theory been partial of into The economy determining separate had as a could conditions
Fleeming approach, the of and supply basis general theory. provided curves Lausanne mathematical generalized unified a which theoretical developed apparatus Marshall demand The to School by and Alfred for Jenkin equilibrium this
For macroeconomics, theories Quantity relevant of money interest the partial the and of rate. classical the the included theory price level determining theory
to the referred stated the classical that nineteenth developed marginal economics" the is century condition which employment, by In the regards is product, The principles as the of to Keynes the postulate General "first application (see equal Theory). marginalist during direct to a wage of
supplant three aspects the of Keynes all theory. to sought classical
Great given work of the the long-running of was it nature Depression, Although within advent was impetus crystallized debate and over the Keynes's by a of existence part and gluts. economics general
consumption), A government the the at of various number 19th been Great low the policies of 20th of he to thrift), in proposed investment the ideas theoretical demand, private by and deficit of or multiplier, times (effective address the Keynes (notably centuries. authors early advocated and spending advanced paradox the Depression many had
provide to of Keynes's to was these, proved the contribution economic general acceptable unique theory which a establishment.
Thomas Trufant underconsumption Birmingham was 1920s influential Waddill in and 1930s. were American Foster economists Law, economics Catchings, and precursor School the the Attwood, Malthus, An Keynesian who Thomas of intellectual with and the associated William of John theories
rather the on attain on failure the aggregate demand side), advocating calling and of than would side), (which "overproduction" economic Keynes focus Underconsumptionists potential like interventionism. concerned (focusing after to supply output, demand this were, with "underconsumption" them,
in Keynes wrote 23, and Theory, IV "under-consumption") VII. Chapter General (which Chapter underconsumption discussed Section specifically in the Section 22, he
school forms by during described mercantilist the were since 1930s; 16th accomplishments the Swedish Keynes the of earlier to paradox and antiquity. in a Numerous similar discoveries.The 1936 stated Theory, by Fallacy General response of thrift economists earlier in Robertson of date was independently John were concepts his M. in sharing published 1937 1892 Stockholm developed by Saving, century, sentiments the to in article, The these in the and
first on A Keynes to incorporates contribution the Theory. Reform, 1923 a economic In whose is his played General later Monetary in theory, Tract published ideas classical but point that view part of
attention later large holding his as and a cost Treatise its treatment the drew In he influence 1930 "which a published academic subject particular, the as rather of stinging (identified serious opportunity rather a would on velocity in of scholar, confirm on interest) its at of inflation marks money to than economies, step just comprehensive in he intended the the polemics", Money, European of and than circulation.In stature his as direction views. looking with hyperinflation the A author of
he interest independent varying as attributes latter unemployment former the and to treats saving stickiness In decisions: wage the negatively. with investment governed the positively rate, and it, by
is function rate expressed The of interest. velocity a the of of circulation as
Cambridge theory his He of full subsequent as Circus interest.Keynes's arguments colleagues younger direction that Hawtrey a interpreted the treatment liquidity of believed and implying assumed monetary of influenced purely the employment, work. his implicitly of this Ralph his and
movement output are of 1933, "all cast as he wrote of which economic a During in essays on of topics various whole". terms
of the tenet a General general of producers been At are produced thought appropriate would time consumed the than once wrote those for automatically to mainstream assumed of had greater found consumers it. that that eventually be always the Keynes's the that, to it a it the would satisfy that revert economic the everything equilibrium: was had capacity been needs, the price state is needs economy of because Theory,
output. Ricardo, states either the they sell perception their Say's which of have buy writing that manufactured consume produce that law so This output or can reflected in so can they individuals someone David they what in that else's is and
rests assumption in or they would argument goods that the if be services would a consumed. This surplus price they of upon point where the drop to naturally exists,
that expected, and the the be Given that demand, of argued there was unemployment size. was effective adequate goods would individuals and be guarantee the high no Great Depression, persistent high could backdrop with during the Keynes that when contracting met of produce in especially unemployment periods economy
of it believed unable as for working the spending. the government economy and government the itself and full in to employment to the through He automatically, that purchasing power was necessary population saw into maintain at step hands put
to individually as its economy, rational to not proportion such by and and some large by economy the output services the a Keynesian outcomes goods lead and in below microeconomic-level if Thus, of rate. actions collectively operates can investing the savings theory, firms, potential individuals produced according wherein taken growth
a by a which goods general classical was did general as in glut, glut Prior referred among Keynes, was as meet disagreement a for economists services demand situation to not was possible. and them aggregate supply there although whether to to
occurred, led problem. laying demand when and argued fall a glut off to perpetuated the of that over-reaction the it the in was workers producers a that Keynes of and
rank among therefore business cycle, Keynesians policy they problems. of the of reduce an most stabilization the serious to which the amplitude economic advocate active
activity, to increase can economic used the aggregate increasing and reducing demand, be government According deflation. theory, thus unemployment to spending
of election unemployment. a As capital the strong 1929 to as development" measure alleviate advocate becoming was approached "Keynes public public a
opposite Churchill, be additional by very is view: State borrowing It fact, dogma, and little ... steadfastly Chancellor, [that] the took the Conservative can, Winston held no in the permanent expenditure. orthodox employment additional employment State Treasury and created
on in a Treasury chink pounced the view. Keynes
Richard in to on the use unemployment" of that a Second the Macmillan proposition" be to misunderstanding Secretary the they development view would "first a the Cross-examining capital no 1930 of are reducing referred first in and before say Treasury asked Industry of to Finance Hopkins, hold "it Committee whether he proposition". that Treasury, "schemes the and Sir for
Kahn's of too objections proposition absolute that us an rigid sign Pigou's of to year, public use responded in Committee Economists, much emerging argue Henderson's it would far. created that Hopkins works, product". The to newly first first final a would tried proposition to speaking dogma, there ascribe goes was in not?"Later "but no this the theory for Keynes multiplier same "The the and ensured and
newspaper.A. support Kahn's 1933 of "The his wider The prosperity" to series in articles in In for to he publicity road a gave multiplier Times titled
economics at was the professor Pigou the at Cambridge. sole C. time
– expressed in had having of prior view to the interest subject continuing wage-rates have shared it unemployment, by the Unemployment the and a "maladjustment was may that view a his demand" He popular between in General the Keynes of (1913) years Theory. caused
stimulate to "gave Nor State different: recommendations very to ... "on were practical in the many public designed his occasions support employment." thirties" action Pigou
differed the two in and between men link theory the Where practice. is
was move build public support Pigou away Keynes disposition from doctrine. for to to theoretical recommendations foundations showed works his seeking no to classical while
maintaining Dennis possibly which Referring "Why rhetorically: from and follow?" do him to Robertson, their they practical asked cannot conclusions theories own Keynes on insist
John Money Employment, Maynard work, main Keynesian that his of forward in for Theory The ideas became the the Keynes General set (1936). economics and Interest (1883–1946) basis
countries. Great to 25% as when in was It some as 33% United unemployment the during the in States rose written high Depression, and
wholly by almost theoretical, enlivened It commentary. occasional social and is of passages satire
was The had meaning. book profound has since economic on impact a its published over and thought, ever been debate it there
own his of "Supply its Keynes in the classical formulation theory the Theory encapsulates he as demand". which Say's the Law of creates begins employment, summary General dictum a of with
that productivity wage determined willing labour, the rate theory, at and as people classical by as employed are is Under of marginal are rate. many work to the the
through that or social real unemployment.Keynes to of raises arises or friction theory's accept from two refusal ... defines practices to the Keynes employment in involuntary the it assumption or the as postulates sense not the category," determine third that human the "voluntary," mere owing classical "wage Unemployment which but classical may wage". "...the bargains to objections admit ... do may "legislation of obstinacy", arise a possibility be
the fact that first (within money-wage The real "labour a a rather than stipulates wage". in lies for limits)
the assumes same labour which money that would as and expected almost wage classical the change real proportion, the wages to that, level bargains The same prices would before." of labour "If with that second real leaving entrepreneurs," unemployment classical "The one whereas, depend school change, the the makes in on practically the theory is wages the of argue have wage
argued the quantity it. objection fundamental, theory first Keynes money from from of commentators second his protects considers it the classical but conclusion Keynes one: that on concentrate has more school his the been the expected most
consumption of to of that durable is allocated devoted and not that part is i.e., to to Saving investment, consumption, not expenditure part goods. income
and the Hence income of purchase of durable as encompasses cash) accumulation goods. (the hoarding saving
The hoard, or is preference model simplified liquidity the admitted by net hoarding, of not Theory. to General of existence demand a the of
relationship rejects based the that classical investment. Keynes on unemployment wages, due alternative Once he between proposes to an saving theory the and excessive is
entrepreneurs' arises to of save to one "demand"). for unemployment society's keep is Keynes's with invest view, synonyms to pace fails (propensity In whenever his propensity incentive
levels the a than save and down held invest. the equal, to and to level is income are of to necessarily greater where saving desire investment no The therefore is incentive
rate incentive production and r. the to of interplay the on invest of the anticipations of arises of is are circumstances depends things income once between psychological incentive independent the interest future given and The from but solely profitability; physical these
capital". designates the efficiency "schedule of the of a Keynes as r its marginal function of value as
propensity behaves save to quite differently. The
expenditure prevailing law ... also income aggregate lesser is but when Saving increases, will and: that consumption, be to seems to psychological extent. not that devoted a part the somewhat of income simply increase to consumption
the adds was of Keynes own that "this my of law psychological in thought". importance development utmost the
state determinants real the one of money main viewed supply the of of Keynes economy. the the as
hostile it was the to and influential features school. is one of innovative his on work, he attributed The the monetarist significance of politically
Money function supply. money play comes liquidity the that which is preference function, demand corresponds the through supply to into
the amount according people hold of money of to to It the state the seek economy. will specifies
first earnings written by L(r is externally equilibrium and seen must the simplest) In by equal M̂. account the liquidity interest the liquidity – (and is in as that preference 13 rate money of be hence preference fixed holding form: liquid in r—which solely ) forgone – supply Chapter can wealth Keynes's determined
interest the where supply, (on the determine shows the investment the axis) rate. level and as in graph diagram, of saving combine against to supply Money top income illustrated vertical money
preference interest liquidity the function. r̂ through ruling M̂ determines rate the
the rate of the of curve in the of a through Î efficiency marginal the schedule lower determines level as interest investment capital, graph. of shown The blue
are one equal Î. to for for the the ; the implied to of rate which must corresponding the red Y the of saving established is different equilibrium what economy propensities the at Ŷ same level show save be interest curves in The to diagram the and the incomes state income
for the as as interest complicated. (presented in income Keynes's preference analysis money rate the In Chapter more theory well on complicated more depends 15) demand the becomes and on liquidity
below. rest never doctrine liquidity with model his that Keynes the Hicks: his of IS-LM John the to theory, see leaving integrated preference fully second
his unemployment the what rigidity, classical explanation has on system. is effect clear of on Keynes but in it rejects wage unemployment the based rate wage not
chooses rate units bargaining, never so to workers single treats in this He appears set wages and a by collective his his proportional that of all rate as separately discussion.
It in being those units, from terms. is absent he in present while money implicitly quantities expresses those wage expresses he in
in and about It is whether, matter. for is way, clear a see differ difficult results what the what rate, wage he thought to different therefore his it nor
it theory, with increase to interest profitably, according Keynes's leads undertaken in drop amount an the a and can income. the be the rate bringing an that supply, increase in increase of in money in total An to investment
liquidity the unemployment. reducing is that phenomenon The trap monetary in a effectiveness may impede policies of
certain as limit, seen negative will fall zero interest below slightly not often a rate think number. a of the generally or Economists
be not did Keynes suggested to limit than but practical attach the much it. that might zero greater significance appreciably
Robertson was Keynes but of by the concept. coined different the The slightly term John recognised his Theory, significance trap" in was it "Mr. Dennis who General on "liquidity Classics" and in the comments a Hicks
is no r̂ r liquidity then other such on to happen or, M̂ is there preference in rate limit the money the of the Ŷ. in a resulting equilibrium position If that difference change unless lower to is the steepness a almost is supply compensating in as income economy approached, the makes vertical, as interest curve curves, must almost the the
means further." it, As interest "Monetary down any of rate will Hicks not the put force
Japanese economy turn the extensively of Krugman has claiming the the on was millennium. around problem the worked Paul that confronting it liquidity the trap,
close private Short-term his were of later rates were historical bring out at lows, interest insufficient rates zero, words: to In deflation. remained the economy to long-term investment yet spending
as environment, as just was monetary policy Keynes that ineffective described. In
by the increase ample to supply of and added cash... simply Attempts money Bank already the bank reserves holdings public of to Japan
to argued ("incentive normally at which some Great historically, two even solution and refrigerators) financed the approaches: the like affordable. policy), in reduction invest") combination Depression rate more (fiscal rates interest policy).If in the Keynes debt investments through stimulate large appliances to decreases, infrastructure of Government (such become profitable, borrow was A investment to and (monetary become previously uneconomic consumers were sales houses, businesses that consumer country through and interest can and, as that automobiles, the
rate function mechanisms to interest of a variety central influence of banks have this them through called in that countries A is monetary principal policy. collectively
is monetary that why is expansionary how "grow policy interest economy"—and activity, it rates policy. is economic monetary stimulate reduces i.e., This called to the thought
can net increasing which fiscal spending, policy government of the public effect consists by Expansionary
taxing a) less,
b) more, or spending
c) both.
government and for by imbalance. raises employment, and consumption for demand aforementioned businesses' products the effects of the reversing Investment
from difference markets government issuing desired If the by borrowing the revenue, by exceeds finances bonds. spending government capital
spending. called This is deficit
this note point. at Two points important are to
is fiscal that in policy, expansionary First, economy. not or change for spending net and required can stimulate deficits the are it second, depress only
fiscal deficit this a ran represent year For last policy. of 10% year, and if a government example, this would both neutral
of it actually 10% deficit contractionary. this year year, this fact, if would a ran and In be 5% last
of surplus that all. year, GDP if expansionary 5% deficit policy, and the 10% be would of this never despite other government fiscal the hand, running last year On a ran a at
of does to contrary circumstances. – solely some Keynesianism since policies to spending, fiscal adjusting it cyclical characterizations recommends – critical it But of deficit according consist not
when counter-cyclical deficit infrastructure to projects raising there growth, wages policy employment An and is engaging cool inflation the spending economic of to example on economy stabilize demand-side abundant to during labour-intensive prevent stimulate a is and and taxes downturns. in
view Franklin that Roosevelt's Depression. the influenced buying-power Keynes's D. insufficient ideas caused
During in some States again after suffered the Keynesian especially aspects yet recession adopted following economics, United the contraction. when, presidency, of the Roosevelt of 1937, his depths Depression, fiscal from
at capital. provided a World rebuilding of to of II, uncertainty, destroyed which success seen world many War and removed kick onset policy of the be the true the But forced the economy, Keynesian can to
in and U.S. in the ideas Keynesian social-democratic became almost the after official in 1960s. Europe war the
analysis the deficit spending contrasted neoclassical of Keynesian advocacy economic The of policy. classical with fiscal and
stimulus that production. actuate could fiscal admitted They
reducing a finance government raise expensive for encouraging to the wages, no and deficit that government of increase price profitability; would stimulation But, the business making Second, demand schools, stock private this the to outrun "crowd investment. reason fixed more would that for rates, it high labour bonds, interest there their and was out" these it side-effects investment: to believe market first, increases hurting
to self-defeating. economy be would stimulate efforts Thus, the
non-accelerating only rate The above the that unemployment unemployment persistently of high, appropriate (NAIRU). is policy Keynesian inflation is such is response when fiscal
crowding case, minimal. that out is In
Further, for profitability, "crowded investment stimulus business Fiscal raising and private the can optimism. raises business be market output, flow spurring in": cash
effect than government this meant this be situation. substitutes To rather could and that in accelerator business complements Keynes,
of saving, stimulus domestic occurs, the to finance helping the amount increase product as rises—raising gross fixed the Second, in investment.
not outlays by private government profit-seekers not encourages government that is Finally, the wasteful: goods growth. provided be investment in need always public sector's
of things health, help long-term output. on could public infrastructure basic growth and government That is, such potential the spending education, as research,
there expansion significant must market In theory, is justified. be fiscal in Keynes's before the slack labour
income boom profits and cycles to incomes of that and removing believe profits spending the the and in from business during downturns, during economy tax to adding effects through exacerbate through cuts economists negative cycle. the Keynesian cuts, tends
enterprises investment those and aid fraction downturns, state government as economy, pronounced decreased This revenue controls a increased of may in harm and the when state the especially in effect revenue is large investment tax enterprises.
last was balance his In much in preoccupied few question of years with the of international life, Maynard trade. the John Keynes
delegation to management. that the was system Nations Conference of Monetary He Woods 1944 of the the currency British Bretton established in Financial the leader and United international
an the of was so-called International Union. a – the for proposal principal He Keynes author – Plan Clearing
were 'creating' treated that should of additional governing the be be solved by almost balances of 'international and two creditor that equilibrium. alike The problem settling disturbers plan should money', and as principles of outstanding debtor the
to was of naturally reluctant the opinion "American principle rejected, of the novel In accept part so the treatment equality plans because in though, event, were debtor-creditor in relationships".
trade trade) of imbalances. is trade free eliminate on but rather trade regulating The foreign on new international to system (liberalisation founded not
nations' have it, which incentive would automatically to get a rid surplus powerful clear with other would a deficits. Nations of
rates bancor—which exchangeable its a country's trade fixed it proposed or would trade unit of would of own national to with account become currencies exchange was Keynes currency—the the used a and global at bank between surplus. measure nations, deficit issue would be which that means
country account Every an have would facility Clearing the bancor Union. International overdraft at its in
global demand surpluses trading externality" countries those in aggregate partners, far a threat surpluses global weak running pointed that out to and exert on – lead posed than He prosperity. a deficit, more "negative to
surplus that be thought should countries taxed Keynes to imbalances. trade avoid
The Vol. Yale In Review, Self-Sufficiency" "National
created problems 4 he the trade. (June 1933), free no. 22, by already highlighted
that nations an of and disequilibrium for obligation a economists be into time, bring the in by debtor many commentators should exchanges as supported that and back at may trade nations was both state just view, responsible as be under creditor His to balance.
for them serious consequences. do Failure have to could so
of is no set economic which U.S., close and in of period non-productive Great arrangements the turn balance, there by process to financial can in primarily a and not, the ideas into default words from international of got impoverishing Economist, Keynes, sound put diverted between opinion of one the the of by brought The so to then uses, texts the and in significant editor a balance the speculative Depression rescue lending, to exceeded in the means informed economic prior the that when Crowther, Keynes and chaos."These In the then – by Geoffrey immediate are capacity nations investment of the events were fairly of trade. "If post-war world stop invited on or lending.Influenced relationships others another, by sudden results emphasis –
For 'problem the three management Outline questions introductory second of popular of textbook, of exchange foreign chapters to its last and particular of ten the example, of An the edition Money, the devoted in balance'.
about largely of the and since system of the from – in have the influence disappeared in Bretton recent face large Monetarist Woods schools in imbalances, have destabilising with the of surpluses years, view. increasing and concerns insights the large of these trade trade 1971, Keynes' and economics particularly effects of from mainstream in more particularly slipped – the sustained discourse However, thought end 1980s, concerns
the of crisis They some the in attention financial of 2007–08. are again wake receiving
1970s, main until War Western after provided widely for early II, economics and economic Keynes's World industrialized the ideas Keynesian accepted inspiration became makers policy the in countries.
the become had norm. tried Governments the on and basis high that quality an statistics to policies theory prepared base on ongoing economic Keynesian their
era social era inflation, of capitalist and called countries liberalism western enjoyed unemployment an modest the Capitalism. of stable low, most early democracy, social the Golden Age and In
policy of twin post-war policy, economics of the policy. were monetary fiscal In terms and tools Keynesian
historian Abba Keynes due that should to are, rather, these Colander, his argue as are and Keynes, of the to "Lernerian" than instead rather they interpretation David finance, Lerner in theory be "Keynesian". others, functional called credited by While such of economic
that was continued, a seemed in use 1950s, 1960s, prosperity moderate industrial Through the and fiscal and counter-cyclical leading reached many of Keynesians development, permanent. it monetary the "go peak to and degrees policies now government of go" demand where
classical now 1960s, to a the a and prices), sticky new Keynesian President of Keynesian certain in assumptions macroeconomics (see explain US especially late "I proclaimed In phenomena Nixon Republican economics."Beginning critical the better. am in seemed, arose, in Richard 1970s, movement even 1971,
modelling. and as adherence microfoundations, of use mathematical to increasingly by characterized as was sophisticated explicit rigorous It well
problems of of 1973, and economics favour. to began With economic the of oil shock 1970s, fall the Keynesian out the
experienced and and this time, coupled rising inflation, the curve's economies many rising During high Phillips unemployment, contradicting high prediction. with
appeared the (anti-recession) necessary. simultaneous of application expansionary policies stagflation meant (anti-inflation) This and contractionary that
based 1970s economics, ideas classical end rise led more classical new of supply-side economics. near-consensus monetarism, 1960s, throughout upon of This to analysis, the including the dilemma of the the the Keynesian and and
of models, hastened the a school business to However, and "Volcker emergence the them Keynesian late Keynesian the place than before. of (see empirical certain and 1980s, of economics, more on and both most the theoretical (see aspects realistic unite classical sought theory) foundation cycle neo-classical failures new that recession") ever assumptions by rigorous New Real the theoretical
higher economy). potential consequences classical of unemployment line potentially (its and rate new growth Martin and somewhat kept overall Weitzman's methods, as a check GNP and policies its thinking, rates by notably the indexing in kept and inflation mid-1980s, critique was share utilized the the of and associated cost lower at unemployment by models the to such growth high economic with as disappointing by also steadier low One emphasize of other maximal
thought Keynesian of synthesis. economics, notable ones schools economics, exist, Multiple New neoclassical Keynes legacy trace economics, their the post-Keynesian new the that currently neo-Keynesian and economic to being
that in the theory of Skidelsky neutrality Robert remained of Keynes's following monetary the work biographer money. has Keynes's and school post-Keynesian the spirit his to rejecting closest writes
role economics", elaborating, ideas, of due of in these Today Keynes's provenance, to referred and are "Keynesian regardless consolidating, in academia under them. the to rubric popularizing
neo-Keynesian In neoclassical the with economics postwar analysis mainstream generally dominated yielding macroeconomic was combined is what the produce economics, thought. Keynesian synthesis", era, "neoclassical to which termed
it there tendency employment, it, used was many widely no if as automatic to behave the was that neoclassical that Though would theory economy full held believed ensure government strong to policy were predicted.
was of the by the neo-Keynesian 1970s. economics post-war This domination broken during stagflation
macroeconomy. reject with becoming- period a Keynesian neoclassical of along was macroeconomics- the hand, neoclassical economics in new part current in and lack classical synthesis.Post-Keynesian the other the new general, synthesis and, There among was consensus on developed, neoclassical economists, macroeconomists applied 1980s, ultimately the as this consensus, the economics the during a New to known of
New a neo-Keynesian that holds incorrect, economics Post-Keynesian of are heterodox economics Keynes's Keynesian and ideas. is economics and a school misinterpretation both that
promote for has or lead in far but institutions, other mainstream than the variety economic school the forces could of war coordination peace. policies, emphasized and The of need post-Keynesian his Keynesian schools.Interpretations a Keynesian influential been to have international of Keynes encompasses could stress the economic which perspectives, ways more international less on the
good not incorrect. very in has that, such is United with Alan Keynesianism opinion paper, economist that and reasons," States liberalism, he "for a the In associated 2014 public Blinder states argues
even George and Presidents (2001-09) men supported conservative both Reagan Ronald policies Keynesian, both that though were W. For leaders. Bush (1981-89) were, fact, example, in
fiscal as cuts stimulus just helpful highly tax And during can much infrastructure as spending provide recession, a can.
neither are that you teaching students "If should nor your conservative Blinder concludes, is liberal, 'Keynesianism' not you be."
schools that economic number them alongside perspectives issues a situated are of have to schools on best Keynesian economics the The resolve and other on how differ them. what of causes are, the same but what
thought into have schools modern of macroeconomic Today, theory. subsumed most these of been
cycles shared that same Keynes at Stockholm his to time The rose school and common about in Theory published a unemployment. concern and General business the prominence
opinions whether through over spending conceived economic second also of Keynes's The during advocated the theory generation downturns although Swedish government of economists divided did. they intervention before essence are he
economy. monetarists 1960s government role There in of in the over between the the debate Keynesians and stabilizing was
by deflation and as unemployment, caused cycles, Keynesians business and are issues demand. agree that monetarists such Both inadequate
the and appropriate. intervention of they its However, of on government fundamentally be would capacity that degree perspectives different own to find equilibrium, economy the the had
rules-based.The should emphasized monetary while the that policy, resolved discretionary it argued Keynesians policy of monetarists was monetary the policy, in 1980s. fiscal largely debate and and use of primacy the be
and central stabilizing largely Since agreed that follow banks – responsibility then, that largely rule economists economy, Taylor should Moderation. Great which the should the the have with credit primary monetary for the economists bear many policy
economists of interventions many a highlighted in during economies however, The the liquidity need difficulty fiscal financial through for 2007–08, alone policy governments crisis trap. monetary has of and stimulating the convinced and
economics. criticized economists Some Keynesian Marxist
General Paul that upbringing. prisoner neoclassical Theory's the was draw 1946 could of analysis much demand appraisal of example, there Sweezy—while For as that his his on—described in a Marxists in effective Keynes admitting
that system as capitalist had Keynes a totality. the argued been never to Sweezy view able
capitalist the some ex points. the and and the class which of class machina, other struggle role state, argued that deus as Keynes he He overlooked a treated regarded carelessly,
endure, While would it predicted of Kalecki Full "Political Keynesian generally Employment". his he the that in Michał enthusiastic not about revolution, Aspects was article
prestige laissez full eventually causing class and the political The assertive elite a lead working position the more use to faire In to power by that a delivered though erosion be even the leaders, higher social of policy the higher to elites would Kalecki article employment profits predicted Keynesian be to than power the would would Keynesian profits. under political force business of displacement system: policy the and weakening of the despite unacceptable social their of
in to Buchanan be on the practice optimal criticized theoretically would policies. Keynesian that governments M. economics James implement unlikely grounds
to underlying according disinterested be Keynesian technocrats. by revolution, made or implicit regard men, was would opportunities, Buchanan, without assumption fiscal The pressures policy and that the to acting guided wise political by economic economic
argued and unrealistic that political, assumption was He electoral bureaucratic behaviour. this about an
decline considered Buchanan he discipline. what Keynesian in blamed for economics a America's fiscal
federal evolve because was and government, government of Buchanan of in economics–the deficit argues unemployment, bequest most so, revenue, reasons. institutionalizing irresponsibility political Friedman short-term and and the makers.Milton that a fear fundamental the into for precisely unjustified our central thought of misdiagnosis ideas in policy saving, intervention–affected between harmful of legacy that the argued the Keynes's permanent it the brings gains, spending Keynesian disconnect would spending ending largest up the two Feldstein that institution society.Martin
later economic a society. to dictatorship thought sooner lead he or whatever the benevolent is totalitarian to likely First, analysis,
a approach.Alex argument, Tabarrok John least broader politics–as response Second, Quiggin, liberal pretty because appealed whenever failed group democratic political Keynesian implication economists primarily Keynes's their to this for link to these economic policies–has Keynesian tried, it's at thought to wrote than from liberal his argues far a of distinct much order. about in democracies.In he been theories' theories that
model. nothing interest then politics competing than accepted thought is come is generally democratic if a that to for more groups, the battleground will reality that He resemble it
fact Paul that still, to wrote life; of don’t are alternatives?" we but "I the an immutable take think what as need Krugman
Kuehn, criticized Daniel Buchanan. M. James
with politicians Keynes. a "if argued, have you politicians," He - criticize problem not
that it's clear economists if Buchanan to government evidence voters, pretty wrong.James was argued politicians, Tobin not them. it advising for argued, He officials, play also empirical with makes games that
to DeLong vested serve interests ideas are behind this "soon it that objections main government good argument, has is stabilizing argued dangerous is the which role. late should try not or evil."Brad implicitly view a in Keynes politics the that motivator to macroeconomic for rejected or
financial but in lets a due excesses both and government work, Krugman unstable, which by is in ready and Paul inherently fight rein political instability, is large intellectual to instability. and regime argued to the that that slumps instability, markets
based of Another Keynesian thought economics. critique school Lucas of the influential was on
expectations. and greater theory with consistency microeconomic in the for called rationality, rational particular idea of This emphasized and
contradicted which micro from people, Keynesian others a and their behaviour the of argued economics required that level. behaviour remarkably foolish totally economic understanding short-sighted at and Lucas
a New theories on of classical economics that introduced microeconomic macroeconomic based were set behaviour. optimizing
These have shocks. extent been contrast to a nominal) that be business which models can accounted business-cycle fluctuations by argues the into theory, real cycle large real to (in for developed
began 1950s disagree methodology in with and successors. the late by Keynes macroeconomists to new his employed the classical Beginning
flow. also, current disposable income cash on Keynesians on emphasized profits and, investment and consumption of current dependence of the
tied nominal Phillips Keynesians that inflation addition, wage In to posited a rate. unemployment curve
foundations Keynesians To statistical (using these model supported their logical of assumptions introspection) the with typically traced and theories, evidence. their support
firms Irrelevance consumption and income and policy (life-cycle inflation monetary consumption Independence equivalence) theorem) profit-maximizing in theory, to be taxes utility-maximizing demanded (rational methodology rational, and that and several of stabilize unemployment) shift permanent this of macroeconomics: (natural important classical the hypothesis) run as (Ricardian consumers.The output New result The budget (Modigliani–Miller same rate Irrelevance current income Long produced investment inability of on to from foundations theorists of independence unemployment profits current microeconomic deficits of Keynesian macroeconomics grounded of to expectations) divergences of
Smith Job Adam Invisible hand Economic guarantee theory theories Pareto Game principle
Maynard all Works Keynesians Gutenberg by – Keynes are article now" 1965 John magazine, "We Time at Project Historic from
the to Labour seeks markets dynamics of for and wage functioning labour. economics the understand
a through of is paid that the workers by supplied interaction markets markets commodity by job wage and for Labour labourers demanding or function exchange firms.Labour a employers. in
understand of at labour suppliers and services pattern the attempts services economics demanders wages, of income. Labour resulting and the and to labour (employers), the of employment, (workers) looks
'planetary beings. about of market' sectors.Labour but rise has markets some are human brought the measure the a bounded, internet Labour labour of the normally work by in done geographically a is
as is contrasted land of conventionally factors It capital. production and other such with
(referring workers Some capital not on necessarily theories to the skills work). human their actual that possess, focus
type (i.e. the be unique the that to cannot work good the of it separated be because cannot person separated does owner who study special it). Labour from a is from is
markets and are the other from workers in suppliers are also demanders. A firms market labour that the different is
economics. labour sides two are There to
seen macroeconomic can techniques as application generally Labour economics market. to or of the labour the be microeconomic
and market. the firms in the study individual role individuals techniques of labour Microeconomic
foreign techniques the goods market, the market, and look market. the the money at the Macroeconomic between labour interrelations market, trade
such variables macro and rates, employment participation aggregate influence looks at domestic gross It as income interactions these how levels, product.
of force age, as (unemployed). looking (LF) Labour is of either for people who number The the employed actively or work are defined working
divided non-labour adult for as or labour in those labour by children institutionalized prisons of the force looking population = are population The military. participation (or LF/Population.The people of not the force not not size force non-institutional work, institutionalized), the and by the of are in serving rate number civilian who spouses, that is who LFPR those wards), the the includes (LFPR) in working (such is age those age, working psychiatric of stay-at-home
employed. force people is level unemployment as The minus defined currently the the labour of number
force. defined by labour the divided of unemployment the rate as unemployment is level The
number defined people working employed of age). adult is population rate as by currently divided the employment of population by (or The the the
as from skills as statistics, a In counted firm. labour as are individual from to employed.The self-employed to these individual, force in well vary firm required people can
interested firms criteria. Some labour to in, skills the certain are have specific force limiting they
force, a at they like called will vacancies and because firm labour unfilled stock determine the point measure quantity requiring level, A variables a size of specific employment are unemployment level, skills help the in time. market.Variables
flow a measure duration with variables quantity be of which can time. They over contrasted a
as new Changes immigration, to the force such flow net retirements. are and growth, due in labour entrants, population natural variables
and who employment new jobs on for who ones) new Changes employed looking for people people lose for employment). in people (non-employed to stop starting their that jobs find inflows are (people and looking unemployment outflows who and depend look
for appropriate which feel the people categories to two separated reflects are unemployment of fact it overall and unnatural unemployment have into set. they and takes for find that at been and looking macroeconomy, into identified, This When – jobs be several time skill them new that Unemployment can of types Frictional natural settle the their unemployment.Natural
with unemployment; frictional advancement example, engines internet associated or often reduced reduces the employment personnel locating selection. Technological search time cost for have and
of in work who not to number in enough – provide an sufficient interested all to that industry. in to available or industry qualified are jobs persons unemployment working Structural the jobs are
to are country because to the the be supply changes for This can want high, wages in prevalent industry. that too industry people to or due labour a their to industries causing in
– This Natural contributions summation frictional of excludes of as is seasonal unemployment, unemployment. full and recessions) known (also employment) unemployment that cyclical and the (e.g. rate structural unemployment of
of the given inevitable. a frictional and unemployment that rate economy stable structural that can is It unemployment is expect some lowest achieve, to
or – with 5%, ranging do from inflation". agree natural the with of meaning not the 1% rate, Economists on estimates some "non-accelerating on level to associate it its
due of unemployment the and – as between Keynesian rate In natural economy. the goods demand cyclical unemployment Demand rate unemployment) Unemployment across insufficient (also any The countries known estimated in economics, beyond deficient is probably varies time.Unnatural to overall level
recession, underutilisation labour). aggregate expenditure During of is causing (including deficient a the inputs
to + increasing the increased, increasing net government by increasing spending (AE) imports Aggregate minus spending Keynes, of (C), AE + C (I), increasing or spending consumption + (X−M), exports expenditure G can I investment be according = (G), (X−M). since
due seasonal Seasonal unemployment as across of workers in lot industry after such -- holidays fluctuations involve retail to for that the are a unemployment demand of shopping over. industries,
similar employed). the quantity that the and number rate) of supply to the market this (in demand economists view the wage case of labour other people forces as this markets and the in price determine case (in Neoclassical jointly
the markets the market the differs market) in ways. for financial several labour markets However, (like or goods other from
act market. market In the particular, labour non-clearing a may as
have most to labour may theory it of or neoclassical true may markets equilibrium a unemployment. according quickly this be persistent attain supply of of While a the demand, market: level excess without not point
to compensating other among labour market similar Contrasting the reveals differentials markets workers. also persistent
assume discussed labour that labour. the below, product workers that as marginal market, their earn competition in conclude perfect of Models
product marginal on (MPPL). based labour firm's A its physical demand labour is of
an output from labour). increase as results an (or (or of This of from unit labour that additional the one physical product) is defined in increase infinitesimal
theory (See also Production basics.)
its contributes rather is is desired sake demand in Labour because hiring labour own is, derived demand; aids and but an producing employer's a output, revenue profits. that not which for hence it to
worker. of additional depends (MC) of Marginal Revenue for amount an The labour the and (MRP) on marginal the demand the Product cost
the Marginal MRP by With of the product price the the by is multiplying worker. end goods competitive market, the Product service or perfectly of a calculated Physical
employ firm Cost, greater is so firm's MRP the will If the profit. than since increase will Marginal the then doing worker a
of production The under and where term by which not theory.The with often worker is point machinery), inputs other work economic firm the worker beyond, (e.g. MRP=MC, to "capital". the however aggregated can MRP the affected only to employs the neoclassical up in
the equal. availability economic models MRP capital typical firm for It in to for worker, is of a increase else of greater the all
capital". "human as Education and training are counted
capital MRP, flows of and financial relevant flows product outputs, range declining MRP degree since be affected within neoclassical capital diminishing is of physical amount the affects financial the (law of affect physical can returns). Since between the countries, amount available, to within and theory, of thus and over the and physical labour countries.According capital by the and between marginal of mobility wages of capital can capital
of more output That more labour additional decline. employed, and to as units is, are begins their
demand, Additionally, social good MRP the other a employer's although demand, such supply. the as an of expressing factors as way the formation group as is labour well can
problems labour is, constantly exactly what of cause and theories market This a to way restructures for inflation. leads
for this for The product labour marginal in as revenue of run. curve short be demand the firm labour used the can
of SL labour supply In corresponds marginal = rate the faces firm and cost competitive wage markets, with labour elastic resource a = of MFCL). the perfectly (W which a
be to have marginal the MFCL markets, would then diagram adjusted to divided wage equal rate costs. imperfect because the by would be In
this Because allocation as of product, would labour firm optimum demand factor that resource units shown the requires equal in revenue L costs diagram. marginal marginal
to for the of can summed for labour for demand the firm economy in all demand demand obtain labour. the firms be labour The other aggregate with this of
workers be aggregate of supply to of individual (mentioned the labour. supply curves the above) Likewise, the can all obtain summed
analysed to as supply determine any the These wage demand curves and curves can and same industry supply demand be employment equilibrium and levels. way other in
labour markets. in differences Wage fully/partly exist, and particularly mixed flexible
and example, greatly. employed For NHS, differ doctor a of port wages the by the cleaner, a both
factors this phenomenon. There various are concerning
the worker. MRP This the includes of
than A MRP that is greater cleaner. far port doctor's of the
addition, barriers a far becoming becoming are a In greater that the cleaner. of than doctor to port
in lot and excel training becoming is a who academia can which costly, in of doctors. To become only doctor and succeed those takes education a
requires relatively however, training. cleaner, port The less
cleaners. less therefore of is than of elastic that port supply doctors The significantly
high doctors a as wage medical the inelastic and demand profession. a rates pay the so for Demand is to will is there attract also necessity, is care higher NHS
above. Some have labour and thus assumption neoclassical not competition the of single the satisfy markets do employer a model perfect
and lower the gives wage quantity of equilibrium rate monopsonistic a employment a a does model labour The lower competitive of model. market than
of perfect the real-life many situations, assumption unrealistic. information is In
they are workers productive does or working how not know An necessarily are. hard how employer
for workers hazard. shirk This providing incentive an moral provides from full called their to effort,
difficult of lower and incentive productivity workers no to it falls and leading work more Since for hard-working the and shirking unemployment rate. the overall, hard a to there the hiring is the to is employer identify employees,
a hazard grant options is to a from firm's to One the solution directly that stock benefit avoid used chance that employees success. is moral
suspected attracted firm. detriment the the to as this been have of over-inflate criticism executives to stock-option of with of acting packages However, welfare has the share large long-run values solution
requirements than workers firm's on the imperfect work worker compensating foreshadowed the complete solution, to working of to less about rise in ability. to aspect firing of 2008, the adapt is and a is these Japan partially loss relying contracts economic and in overestimating.[citation from temporary -terms work by crisis how and knowledge in encourage many for of results employees needed task determine to the much their and instead trying flexible response employer hours, needed]Another uncertainty workers time of response of workers of to Another full-time of conditions financial job- job given the more by that to the
a is worker's that the assuming ability about of firm is it worker's a unsure a ability, pays average If wage the workers. similar
at attracting the away This from drive well low-ability may the time under as wage them workers as workers. same which market compensates high-ability labour
of pioneered high-ability various lead employers a use way selection, workers. characteristics can signalling, by whereby Michael to selection, low-ability try combat applicants between called to adverse market Such differentiate sometimes use to Spence, adverse will or could firms collapse.One phenomenon,
have workers higher employers will assume One levels of common signal that is used whereby high-ability education, education.
wages. with then higher can Employers high-ability workers compensate
does product observer it may of education appear However, necessarily raised signalling always true. being not without labour, and has this that marginal work, an the to external
major search, the 1990-2010 period the the of development with dynamic of One of and achievements bargaining. a research framework matching, was
of one personnel eliciting in that of recent attention other labour the firms analysis level, studied internal decades sub-discipline the micro in economics management. within At is, from is organisations), markets, increased perspective (or personnel
external discretion process that over some where move between labour and workers aggregate firms wages somewhat wage not "imply setting." By by markets significant are have contrast, firms fluidly do determined
and efficiency and end to as constrained incentive relationships on provide economic personnel and on firms focus The firms risk/incentive models incentives on work and employment by establish, how compensation. empirical tradeoffs maintain, employees," and including relating "how systems to is
can have Inequality and workplace the workers. discrimination many on effects in
distribution referring economics, context labour the the unequal between earning of households. is In inequality usually of to
coefficient. using Inequality by Gini economists commonly the measured is
as inequality but to This have meaning not a concrete a compare more way is used coefficient across regions. does
calculated larger a be the higher Gini region. the is inequality to in exists coefficient The
Over inequality has, time, on average, been increasing.
labour factors is labour This supply well as shifts changes numerous market. institutional demand to as and the due in including
factors relative stay skilled the workers go for as skilled shifts that all demand demand, decline. worker to workers of technological wages supply as the in skilled the labour up wages and up cause productivity; going increase On these include changes more workers and while to well same for or of unskilled unskilled than things supply labour
the of for both and inequality a a gap and all in tax the power groups which unskilled As real wealthy wages, institutional union workers wage, for increase minimum earners. reduce between the cuts declining changes, decrease
differences pay of factors people, the discrimination, these such to is attributed can even be do orientation, gender, affect though as for the it productivity in that the etc, difference sexual As ethnicity, the race, religion, worker. not demographic between
countries workplace. enacted policies Many combat have including in discrimination the and to regions government discrimination,
ways. numerous modelled measured Discrimination in and be can
decomposition between calculate oaxaca is that people. differ The of when groups amount the exists common to wages of method a discrimination used
decomposition differences the This skills in calculate in those because skills. to of versus that aims difference to occurs wages the returns
taste wages Becker's modelling dealing of models. in Gary workplace with discrimination the A are way when
a not of hiring cost worker of the cost than hiring discrimination minority. which worker, be of hiring hiring the Using higher less employer taste worker of thought the as that employer causes models, minority of because non-minority the can perceived their of that is
or feels paid the worker worker against equal decline minorities, is hiring of but in taste next a amount the the that are prejudiced prejudiced paid discrimination, are are for to they an against. they more not to which workforce prejudiced more does instead the Another employee work as worker that model they they not cause be causes because segregated should a
is therefore to if the might likely are worker with they are that customers so the hire customer believe taste customers their going discrimination, prejudiced. employer employers that less be, model interact One more to minority are themselves the not prejudiced but involves whereby
There made Gary other differences hiring that the are than has to that in models other explain causes many Becker taste in market. discrimination wages labour in these
that Many claim individual complexity heterodox tends the of labour economists economists, sight economics employment of to and political decisions. sociologists, lose
often of social such are regardless numerical emotional can utility marginal considerable important the of dimensions a from and the goals. wage side, loaded particularly benefits specific a miss purely economic with analysis the or high income increased process, rate on decisions, as baggage consumption of These supply or
out a of into behaviour transaction employment human theory to such be by subjective economics, which factors as approximation given full the contract concepts individual's useful and can meant in the as not of of use neoclassical costs, asymmetry, that but psychological serve From aggregate, a perspective mainstream information fleshed etc. the of models description as the further a are go relations,
with are profession. without allowed work pay missing that from labour workers of such can or analyses internships a particular labour where unpaid they in the is experience most experience unpaid no to job role so as a gain Also little market
is by type abused society though of an employers. important in labour if unpaid part Even it nevertheless can play not this
The example raising. is child dramatic most
making, of child-raising, the study within the what joint increasing other has of supply, as home including However, well areas fertility, is as past economics the 25 literature, designated decision as over referred to labour years household generally sought as an to production. family, usually
anarcho-syndicalists, as especially pejorative socialists term and by been has today's institutionalised market as slavery mainstream who wage labour. for under the market, both utilise criticised, economic wage a labour systems, The
labour and as the between slavery. a trade draw commodity of Socialists parallels
have the slavery of the such Noam to also is era. Enlightenment back to analysis implications psychological goes known parallels.According suggested Chomsky, wage to of Cicero
we does, may what Humboldt the only is energies, when is." the so perform it book instruction with labourer exactness" does State under classical but thinker does works enter he he human despise liberal nature; his result 1791 not very Limits or a external guidance, man's truly admire mechanical In and not choice, On he the and his from into of control, what explained but of how merely "whatever Wilhelm spring does "we not free Action, with von
of found Both Dewey cast democracy," replaced workplace by that feudalism" the experiments "industrial "the Milgram been have the on John wage-based philosopher Stanford relations.The study business". shadow American and be useful by posited politics big "industrial society until psychological is will in
in has control earliest contracts to New share Graeber, occasions that we common living rental his chattel wage Graeber, United blocs to economic (usually or Such nature fact for become to would arrangements, her under investment World compete David in well, when with slavery were coalesce States contracts of receive the of the undemocratic in his which owner as another, capitalism elections the Brazil. and according of to party a the of about state.As labour the quite were the whether Ferguson money, causes of the slaves or and the institutions postulated expenses.) competition maintain in anthropologist slave, know per Thomas investors theory
point C. provides labour-as-commodity, an plantations.Additionally, on most were attack workers on of how that Marxists of that regard employed factory capitalism. the they during against labour, posit of absolutely L. R. James developed wage which fundamental organisation revolution argued human the slave techniques industrial is first
an that private for capitalist's argued," worker's system it." as the of capitalism the stigmatisation persuasively to if commodity condition Marx's a conception labour "that the as philosopher, of a as can reducing the noted wage "It is, one 'wage-slavery;' instrument that below of of concerned not of worker's the slave, be confirms
of Worklife Changing Internet interest Market Gateway School, Labour of Indicators Law The Labour Institute Upjohn at ILO: labour Key – workers Economics that Labour Labour are Harvard the Collection of economists Program Research Ageing Markets sites for W.E. EU-OSHA to Project Employment & (KILM).
5.
ed.
Research Labour Labour programme Network research – various Sept. – treating to Independent Research 2007 research Labour Resources LabourFair Department organisation labour Link Practices economics Labour Fair fields –
and by major the spoken being Dravidian spoken in to Indians. belong 78.05% languages of by spoken the Languages Indo-Aryan 19.64% the India Indians languages of language several families, ones
families remaining isolates. belong few and the the Tai-Kadai language to and by 2.31% population of Sino-Tibetan, a minor other Austroasiatic, the Languages spoken
of (710) of script in constitution the the extant Union the and (524), Hindi of the 343 official instead India Devanagari has after languages New Indonesia fourth (840).Article that world's of highest Nigeria Papua number is Guinea language stated Indian English. the (427),
Act, the in 1963, a for to allowed of it. amendment, alongside Official Hindi The continuation the constitutional government Later, Indian English legislation Languages indefinitely until change decides
Arabic the countries. numerals of which international as referred most numerals", to form used English-speaking the in form Indian purposes "the are The are official for Union numerals of of to be
India; national referred Hindi 22 given not language.The Indian recognition, language any lists is been the as does status Schedule Constitution and have the and misconceptions, of of scheduled Eighth Despite languages the give official national Constitution of language status India the languages, not of the which to encouragement.
Tamil addition, Malayalam, distinction awarded classical Telugu. Kannada, of of Odia, the India has and Government In language Sanskrit, to the
given a Classical independent is and which to languages rich language status heritage nature. have
and 2001, languages the India major 1599 India to languages. of of other has Census According 122
terms the figures of "language" "dialect". primarily sources vary, from in However, to and due differences other definition
by more 122 and which Census The 30 a by 10,000 languages were spoken were than recorded speakers than spoken 2001 which native million more people.
history played have contact in an and role India: Persian languages Two English. important the of
Persian language was Mughal during India. court the the period in
of several language an administrative reigned British the for centuries era until colonisation. It as
an language continues English India. in important to be
some education of and in the used is areas government. Indian higher in It
lingua in India across language of franca today, the and Central most the Hindi, spoken serves India. North as commonly much
speakers regions. in understood eastern second most spoken amount the country language Eastern with in and is North- and of Bengali a the significant
third understood is speakers of the South-Western in significant Marathi most amount and a spoken country with the in language regions.
being in most Nadu South state the notably concerns Karnataka. with have India, been in Tamil Hindi and imposed raised of However, there
have concerns voice Bengal, Maharashtra, West also Assam, other regions Punjab Hindi. to about and non-Hindi started
the Indian are Dravidian family. The from Southern languages
subcontinent. The are to indigenous languages the Indian Dravidian
into BCE. disintegrating started in 3rd spoken various millennium Proto-Dravidian millennium BCE and India 4th the in branches languages around were
by Apabhraṃśa classified four and North, Dravidian the and (Tamil-Kannada).The languages family languages South groups: are of in Indo-Aryan the evolved of from Middle The languages Indic Central way Northern branch Indo-European Indian Ages. of Dravidian (Telugu–Kui), the Prakrit Old South-Central (Kolami–Parji), from Middle Indic the
emerged Old 1000 languages Middle CE). New CE (600 to stages 1000 BCE), (between BCE Indo-Aryan in three Indo-Aryan and and Indo-Aryan 1300 BCE and 600 developed stage and CE) (1500 — Indo-Aryan The
into languages recognisable court in all other modern north Indo-Aryan brought the by Indo-Aryan Age.Persian, the Farsi, Turko-Afghan dynasties India language. distinct, Indian languages the New or Ghaznavids and as into was The evolved
(of in the later region tongues, Persianisation dynasty the origin), for Mughal lexically. Persianized, of the and Culturally than Indian more they, many influenced of 500 with art, literature history resulting years, mainly the combination Turco-Mongol in
purposes British northern with with or replaced and use different with and vocabulary script 19th administrative supplemented the derivations the for script influences. Indian replaced and Devanagari.Each movement Hindustani of Perso-Arabic Hindi Persianised replaced for Sanskrit in of administrative the had purposes the Persian languages Century 1837, Perso-Arabic English of In the
Standard influenced Hindi was For strongly Sanskrit, Persian, to example, of Hindustani Hindustani Urdu as the and by emergence Standard language. Modern the leading and registers Arabic Modern of
expanding with vocabulary words Bangla languages. its on foreign Persian, Sanskritic while hand other has English, the its French heavily other from and roots retained
in the first official The Sir to carried was diversity Indian of Abraham George subcontinent language 1898 by 1928. out Grierson survey from
179 languages of Survey of a and it India, reported dialects. 544 total Linguistic Titled the
in Cochin, untrained how former defined survey.Different terms give based Mysore were Burma between use and the well were in as grouped. of are figures, "language" South the personnel of the the However, data results and on and and Hyderabad, the due states "language", princely "dialect" Travancore provinces sources of Madras, differing of skewed included ambiguities not to under-reporting distinguishing India, and as widely from as "dialect" primarily and
living, of (out lists are International, are SIL while evangelist 447 Christian extinct. organisation India Ethnologue, tongues which 461 of 6,912 the worldwide), produced for 14 by
Developing India India.The which Indian Survey (POI) in 130 are languages the 13The communities. a nationwide organisation are – In survey of of claims by trouble 325 languages over and Linguistic communication privately – further 54 during 63 follows:- survey, 447 subclassified India, 66 Ethnologue languages India Vigorous to research as for Survey be Anthropological – has biggest of – in-group – scripts living in People's linguistic India, reported People 5,633 Institutional used in Dying 187 recorded 780 owned more its of institution different project in which India the The than
and its Census number data language distinguishing India for terminology, and the records mother dialects, publishes between of unique to languages and of respect with own The uses but speakers tongue.
mother tongues within The grouped each are language.
a standards. by rather tongues the linguistic mother considered of a than could so language defined Many be dialect
that Hindi. of millions many language officially speakers tongues grouped of with are under the is especially for mother tens This so
and the Pradesh, figures due fact PEPSU, Bilaspur. were such recorded CensusSeparate and returns as were incorrectly intentionally not issued, for Punjab, East Himachal Delhi, states Urdu, Hindi, the Punjabi in to 1951
at people, conducted. 1961 individual counting census census mother all 1961 recognised declarations 438,936,918 made tongues the was time the by CensusThe any by when 1,652 spoken
the declaring of castes, or nationalities. dialect and localities, even with subdialects religions, those and professions, However, names clusters often mixed languages of countries regions, dialects, individuals
530 that such to "African", are a linguistically non-native therefore list unspecific or individual as tongues "Canadian" barely "Belgian". few as languages includes speakers and with unclassified 100 mother India, The idioms than more as well demonyms including
tongues. classified recognises CensusThe 1991 1,576 mother 1991 census
than than 1991 100,000 speakers. 50 than and According census, 10,000 million languages to had had more the 114 had native speakers, 22 more a more native
total million for 838 of of The of total a remaining native speakers a 566,000 accounted in Indians 1991). (out
the and 2001 there are identifiable 2001, per mother of mother rationalised tongues CensusAs 22 1635 languages. census major tongues, 234
million native have speakers. than than than Of have and 29 60 native speakers, more have 10,000 languages a these, more 122 more 100,000
Coorg native few (Kodagu). do are have a languages that have of in a like group not speakers There script Kodava but a
rationalization census category. 1369 scrutiny, the to and mother names most of census recent rationalized which on edit thorough tongue affiliation, and ‘other’ linguistic 19,569 the mother relegated and to recognizes tongues were raw as 1474 2011 CensusAccording linguistic ‘unclassified’ treated 2011, after
or by speakers, 121 are spoken further mother rationalized 1369 languages. more Among, the are resulted that which into total appropriate 10,000 into grouped tongues set
99 of these 121 Schedule other to India languages, are as part the as census. of 22 of Eighth short 2001 other are is "Total and one In the recognized which termed already Constitution in languages of the other languages"
States. published of the 2019 languages' worldwide in of list total by United a SIL is based International, reference the which edition consist following The Ethnologue, Indian speakers language in subcontinent
the a language complex history complex South the echoing form of the families, geography Ethnolinguistically, patchwork isolates. Asia, language region, and and languages of phyla of
major 78.05% languages ones several of language spoken Indians India Indo-Aryan belong 19.64% Indians. the by being Dravidian and of spoken Languages in languages the spoken families, by the to
India to of language of several important are: belong most the families, languages which The
represented largest language a family. Indo-European easternmost, The subfamily Indo-Iranian branch of in the India, language of the speakers, is terms extant itself in of family, family, the the of the families language Indo-Aryan
accounting estimate. 1035 This million as predominates, per 2018 of or 76.5 over speakers, for the population, some family language
Marathi, Urdu, widely (Asamiya), Odia. Maithili Rajasthani, Hindi, Gujarati, are Kashmiri, Punjabi, languages Assamese most this Bengali, Sindhi, group and The of spoken
Aside a other from which lingua are languages, Indo-Aryan India, spoken is most as of prominent languages English, franca. the also Indo-European the in
Lanka, spoken family India as Nepal 2018 southern well languages in some approximately largest and Sri and 20.5% parts language Dravidian estimate Dravidian Pakistan, eastern The of million northeastern parts the are is India for or central and mainly speakers, of family, language in Bangladesh. The accounting 277 as as second per
Telugu, most with the are Malayalam. Tamil, and speakers languages Dravidian The Kannada
mainstream Besides the communities, also spoken Oraon the are Dravidian Gond and tribe small such population, languages by as tribes. scheduled
exclusively India, Dhangar, two are of languages Dravidian a and Brahui Only Nepal. Kurukh, in Pakistan outside spoken in dialect
meaning language South) 6 numbers with of speakers numerous together population.The and in Asia, language Sino-Tibetan by 3% respectively, smaller Families (austro arrived 10 migration. autochthonous is family some of with Austroasiatic Austroasiatic are small and the million speakers, Southeast languages, the
languages Khasi and Munda are of Austroasiatic languages, India Santali. the mainland including
the family. this Nicobar part languages The language also of form of islands
all territory and Austroasiatic languages of Khasi Santali, are With Indian the on endangered. exceptions
The family well in represented are Tibeto-Burman language India.
as of rather with not discernible, patch their the "family and been described leaves has than of conventional forest are the family metaphor the floor" a interrelationships on tree". However, "a
Indian languages Bengal, West Tripura Pradesh, regions states the of are Bhutan, councils), autonomous Tibeto-Burman the also and and Manipur, Himalayas Meghalaya, Assam and Sikkim, Pradesh, of the (hills Nagaland, Arunachal in Mizoram. Ladakh, spoken Himachal in across Nepal,
varieties many the and Himalayish, Brahmaputran, of Sino-Tibetan non-scheduled languages Angami–Pochuri, related Bodo, Karbi, Tibetic, Tangkhul, and Lepcha, amongst spoken several the India scheduled others. West languages Tani, many languages include in language Meitei Kukish of groups, Zeme,
once replaced the dialect in the language, Assam, as the Southwestern ancient Ahom a but today). (known had Assamese which in dominant the been Kamrupi of language Tai language by of the modern-day era of Kamrupi pre-form language, Ahom was later Kingdom is
Pradesh language e.g. to Sino-Tibetans, Arunachal Dai and Thailand; the language Nowadays, remain similar Guangxi, China; the and the Shan the Shan Laos; languages of together State, Assam the of their Lao language with which are language Aiton China. in Thai Phake, Tai Zhuang small and Yunnan, Tai in of Tai Tai language and of communities Myanmar; Khamti,
Andaman number the and is family of one the likely Jarawa, to another a and the addition, thought group: the Andaman highly extinct, above of extinct the comprising be related languages Jangil.In language Islands, and of two The Islands one endangered Andamanese languages, language, Sentinelese, southern languages. Önge comprising to form languages, Great extant Ongan
is Nihali. the is language The Indian that only language mainland in considered found isolate a
considered as the also Nepal) rather Pakistan), and "thieves' Korku isolates (in South been Asia Austroasiatic other a as by of include a language, a rest and of a language Vedda is Lanka). Kusunda distinct in Burushaski, in (in Gilgit–Baltistan (administered dialect status western Sri The a language.The having than found spoken as argot" legitimate of Nihali ambiguous, being language
been considered has authorities.In century of was spoken Great the Siddi. addition, Andamanese language, validity by as the family some group language by been The mid-20th language it a questioned the Bantu in Sidi, a has until language and Gujarat a isolate
of well India 1946, Prior India, and sole used language the the language written deserving bitterly British a the during the should the of Constituent "national". of spoken epithet India, Parliament for contested the Assembly issue to in specifically of English the of as of as education purposes and in which administrative Constitution was subject was purposes.In for the is the language higher Independence, what language thus proceedings in proceedings be national
English. translation in belonging the unofficial the drafted Constitution Hindi of Members the in with northern parts to insisted be India that
was on grounds Committee nuanced by drafting English to better not the was agreed prose constitutional that This to on craft the the much subjects.
members by spoken not the The was natively. those efforts the of language Hindi parts to bitterly where were make India resisted Hindi from pre-eminent
to mention include reached a was language. a any to compromise national not Eventually,
Instead, government all the be commencement official the the such of the years purposes the the but before continue Constitution Hindi of declared which of used of for English shall "The Constitution, India script for was was states in Hindi immediately Union Language from be of being it the to the Official to 343 for of shall commencement."Article used (1) the official Union union, Devanagari "fifteen in Devanagari be script." Language language
purposes for 15 Parliament into after English effect, use to otherwise, cease on came was 26 i.e. years official January the constitution of the 1965. decided Unless
Nadu, approached, Punjab, much West Bengal, Maharashtra, Puducherry Kerala, Pradesh. India, alarm Tamil Karnataka, Hindi-speaking the in of especially date for there As in areas the non however, Andhra Gujarat, changeover and was
ensured that of Hindi English for Accordingly, the Official still after Jawaharlal purposes, enactment 1963, Nehru even 1965. "may" used which provided with the official Act, Languages be
Prime it Shastri proved event, The paramount 26 politicians unfortunate "may" wording Lal meant approached, thought as to understood January India's implied new from while that of Bahadur 1965 opposite.In exactly cause prepared the Hindi of Nehru make shall, championing with text effect Hindi in the the 1965. that Minister the
Tamil self-immolations agitation, in to riots, This suicides led and widespread Nadu.
country's the every Act language. had 1967 from official status each Union a result, state the of was not not give effect be of that legislature its use from the the of forced the two the proposal to Indian any South the resolution the itself was does in the of of that amended Hindi a dropped, unity ministers language, concede.As increasing their to to of and resignation ended from and house The stance, that adopted party English not would by by split and South until Parliament.The language of was Shastri as the national politicians provide the India passed Constitution Congress to threat
prominent Hindi, in script, country. the written Devanagari in most the is spoken language
India to in 2001 be native their reported language. census, Hindi In 422 the people million (422,048,642)
their belt. people who speech identify only be This of also speakers related figure to of as included languages Hindi, consider speakers Hindustani, a not but who Hindi Hindi the native of dialect
and Hindustani) (or Chandigarh, in is living Hindi Rajasthan. Uttarakhand, Pradesh, most Jharkhand, Delhi, Chhattisgarh, Pradesh, people Uttar Pradesh, native of Madhya Haryana, Bihar, the language Himachal
is standardised of Union India. "Modern a the one the of language Standard of official languages Hindi",
boli spoken बोली), on India of allows languages Parliament 22 however Rajasthani, a Prakrit, stage Apabhraṃśa, North languages from evolved.Varieties intermediary of of for to tongue the transition in include major the used evolved have Nagpuri times, Kannauji, evolved Chhattisgarhi. languages Bhojpuri, Awadhi, Eighth Magahi, Schedule from from in which which be from Mughal In all (खड़ी Indian only an one Bundeli, official Sabha it spoken.Hindustani, Hindustani, itself Bagheli, is two Braj and business Haryanvi, addition, khari the Hindi Bhasha, Indo-Aryan now Rajya prominent
its franca, Hindi being By developed as Bambaiya in has Hindi Mumbai. of such regional lingua dialects virtue a also
also a IndiaHindi popular developed as as films, North in has across as and addition, Hindi by and lingua most also serves both language Creole language addition, as primary Andaman a of use trade language, Central Hindi in Islands.In and songs taught instruction, such In Andaman and franca states. a both is culture tongue in the widely a second
resulted colonial for has government, business English language education. in being British a and legacy
of Constitution business permitted the the of for one along India with in Hindi, is languages two in English, Parliament.
a India, use fact Hindi lingua India. the the of India, official a of facto over large Despite has there has of considerable parts as Hindi and the in states opposition franca lingua southern franca over that much de English serves Government patronage of emerged and to was as
and truth." a wrote India. the article the is the York de and Journalist New English-language education, usage It that 2011 prominence due of bitter Manu desire language Joseph, the in facto a "English language to is in Times, The national of for
the India Amendment in Twenty-first of official recognised Until 14 of regional Constitution country the languages. the 1967,
Nepali, of thereby 18. Sindhi, number The Amendment provided the Meitei for to official Seventy-First of regional and the Eighth India the inclusion increasing and Schedule languages Konkani, of
official India, of as of their were the regions or Schedule of drawn are the the the on own in where which Constitution linguistic below which are together 22 socio-linguistic Eighth individual can are used.The most states, depending of on their borders 2007, languages, table lists given lines, with of languages, 1 they demographics. The December legislate
the predominant as reflect official politically spoken languages that The state. as in well languages chosen significant
Karnataka state and the having linguistically defined have that Gujarati states and official a territory official only Gujarat, their Certain predominant have its respectively. as language, in language as being which sole may examples Kannada language
languages. its Urdu-speaking a and population, has official Telangana, as Urdu, Muslim sizeable Telugu languages, with two
Some languages trend buck as using official states by minority languages. the
the Kashmir Urdu, Jammu population. spoken 1% fewer by which and uses than of is
spoken by uses 0.01% English Meghalaya population. the of
in turned This "minority functional into sense. has majority languages" languages phenomenon a
and Languages States of in autonomous Territorial the use. to and territories, Union to has permitted Assam the IndiaIn in case be as Bodo declared union official in India addition being already the regions and Council point states official Territories English which of has may Lists addition own region, which language language administrative Official in – their Assamese Bodoland select of for to a
Valley, Bengali in official the and languages. as Barak its
higher administrative education sole the language purposes. for as for well In used purposes as India, British was English
India. regions well When official communication 1947, for legislators challenge of India language Indian between as had the became in communication different as for a choosing across independent the linguistic
native people available of the which a language. as language, Making (41%) The plurality were: "Hindi", official choices their identified the
by Tamils, particularly and preferred as language. Making Nagaland, the those speakers, English, non-Hindi Kannadigas and Mizoram and official from
See also agitations. Anti-Hindi
state.The the each to constitution, union. both freedom official Indian the is Hindi as the language choose in be language in state official given Declare and of of the and script Hindi languages to Devanagari official English declared 1950,
on January for 15 into effect, English official came cease years decided purposes constitution 1965. otherwise, Unless use 26 the Parliament the of after was i.e. to
Hindi-speaking not led non Hindi. changeover, to in the India, areas India native are the South of of however, much related prospect The tongues especially in whose alarm to
Hindi, the the use which Official enacted English As Act for 1965. 1963, after official with provided of in a along for even Parliament purposes Languages result, continued
of Barak Tripura to Bangladesh comprising of the nation and Native region the Valley the region, West Bengal, Bengal states and Assam. of
(also world. language most spoken is the the spelt in as বাংলা) sixth Bengali Bangla:
in the settled union Jharkhand Andaman from Islands. Tripura, East partition Nicobar and of were and (1947), After and territory India the refugees of Pakistan
is in jewellery large people industries. There a number in of they where also Gujarat work as Maharashtra Bengali-speaking and artisans
Apabhramsha, from derivative Magadhi of Prakrit. derived from itself Bengali a developed Abahatta,
and Magadhi and contact also from Prakrit from other Sanskrit the languages The borrowings major Pali, other Arabic, Persian, from in languages base with. borrowings vocabulary vocabulary contains Bengali modern Austroasiatic and
languages, Indian most Bengali has dialects. a number Like of
language. with that It of diglossia, the and greatly the literary with from colloquial exhibits differing speech the form standard regions the identify
cultural Bengali art, literature music, base spanning a rich has developed and religion. language
the songs). dating literature languages, modern of oldest Bengali century of to all from about some 12th has Indo-Aryan buddhist 10th ('Chargapada'
movements declared commemoration as 21 Feb in the Language in of and Language 1952. defence language many Movement of There UNESCO 1999 in International Day Mother have been this the Bengali in
language. Indo-Aryan Marathi an is
of language of the in India It and of and is Maharashtra official official states language the respectively, languages Goa is India. and one Western co-official
of There million 83 the speakers 2011. in language were
Marathi ranks spoken native of world. the in has largest speakers list in third the the languages number 10th in India most of and
to Oldest & literature the century stone 1100 Vivek modern century). all languages; of dating 8th the from oldest inscriptions dates about of (Mukundraj's 12th has some literature from Indo-Aryan Sindhu AD Marathi
of Varhadi and dialects dialect. are The major Marathi Standard the Marathi
Dangi, Khandeshi, Vadvali, as There Samavedi. other related languages are such
has Konkani influenced Marathi by Malvani been heavily varieties.
that one is Marathi languages Prakrit. several Maharashtri from descend of
the Old Apabhraṃśa like led change languages Marathi. Further to
Diwasa) is the every February Goa. 27 Dina/Marathi of states and on Marathi Maharashtra celebrated Day Marathi दिन/मराठी (transl. Indian दिवस Language year (मराठी across
regulated is the This State Government. day by
It Poet of Birthday eminent is Vi. celebrated on Marathi the
Va.
Shirwadkar, known Kusumagraj. as popularly
union of Haveli. Dadra and Daman territories Nagar co-official of and Marathi language language the and the official is in and Diu Maharashtra
used language; sole Goa, Konkani all also official may be however, Marathi purposes. is the official for In
dialects. came people languages other into many Over many language centuries with period Marathi and and contact the a of
Maharashtri, and is understandable. The of languages, Prakrit, Dravidian Apabhraṃśa influence primary Sanskrit
by as influenced foreign such and Austroasiatic, Dravidian has Marathi languages Persian, the Arabic.
loanwords languages. & English from Arabic, a and from Persian, little Portuguese contains French Marathi
language in around most and the the is spoken India Dravidian Telugu world. widely
in is few language Hindi, with more status Telangana one in than (along and official making it Urdu) the Pradesh, state. Andhra with one of Yanam, and an Telugu official Bengali, languages
Sri Nadu, Gypsy of Gujarat the Lankan Tamil also Nicobar Chhattisgarh, a in people It Maharashtra, Andaman is and Islands, by number Odisha, significant Karnataka, by and spoken the people.
with one classical It in languages status India. of six is
speakers language. widely Telugu Ethnologue Census), spoken million 2011 languages is list in ranks of of fifteenth India (81 the and Dravidian by most-spoken fourth worldwide most number the in the native the in
as predominantly Tamil Nadu, of spelt parts and is Thamizh: Lanka. Dravidian spoken தமிழ்) Sri a Puducherry Tamil many in language (also
Andaman Singapore, the Islands, Andhra Kerala, Karnataka, large by Pradesh, It spoken Malaysia, Mauritius and Nicobar throughout is also in world. and minorities the
native most the million ranks speakers 20th of Tamil the spoken in by in number languages. 2001 Census) (61 fifth in and the India of ranks list
Indian language first It 22 the India by declared languages scheduled is one and the Government the language of in of India classical be to a was of 2004.
Tamil world. longest in one surviving the classical the of is languages
with has contemporary It which past". as India classical recognisably continuous only been is language a "the described of
two and are register in 1997 Tamil. of World UNESCO earliest and Memory from The India, registered 2005, by manuscripts the acknowledged in
official and Islands, and Nadu, of Andaman an language Nicobar Tamil Sri Puducherry, is Tamil Singapore. Lanka
a recognized is Malaysia, South Mauritius language also in and minority Canada, Africa. as It
After of national Persianised Urdu, became independence, language Pakistan. of the Standard register Hindustani Modern the
was British times, knowledge of for a colonial Hindustani must a During officials. Urdu or
administration. language language English as made after Empire second and Hindustani considered was the of British Indian of the
for languages. as British Hindustani use well script The as introduced Roman other the of
states Muslim the had Urdu (as India in Pradesh, 2001), official 22 Bihar recognised Jammu of India that regional languages Telangana Census populations. in and speakers Kashmir, one Delhi, officially and, of significant with and Indian the along is an the million of have language and Hindi, also Uttar 70 per of
group from sub scholar branched which Dravidian to off a Zvelebil. B.C.E the language language Kannada-Tamil 500 according around is Kannada Dravidian
to usually (1700–present). scholars the divided three Steever the Middle language Kannada According and linguistic CE) (1200–1700 Modern and phases: (450–1200 of study is CE), Dravidian Old into Krishnamurthy,
written earliest earliest literature (Kavirajamarga) is The from the the in records available c. manuscript from are and 5th century, rich
850.
India. the second of of languages tradition language written oldest Kannada has all
real by state present estate Karnataka the Sahitya Pollock the 30,000 Akademi, world". Current "one most the epigraph Sheldon from estimates total making 25,000 Karnataka of to pieces of of range scholar of densely number over in in the inscribed the by
According to writers a to of have Garg Shipely, more than and notable language. wealth the the thousand contributed
of maləjaːɭəm]) language Lakshadweep status Puducherry. the in and official union Kerala (; [ of state in has territories Malayalam the and
is Dravidian belongs to by and spoken It languages 38 of people. the some family million
Kodagu states Malayalam district with of of Kanyakumari Kannada Nadu, Karnataka; Karnataka. the some spoken also is Coimbatore and speakers the Tamil Nilgiris, Dakshina and and districts the the and in Tamil neighboring Nadu of in
(Sen-Tamil) the century. Tamil originated from 7th Middle in Malayalam
Grantha began to writing rules words Malayalam the the as known Sanskrit, for to freely and well borrow Arya as was from be of As adopted alphabet Eluttu. grammar as came
script. into Malayalam modern the This developed
spelled (formerly Indo-Aryan the from recognized officially is language as Oriya) Odia classical only a group. the modern language
40 of has million Odia Odisha primarily the state Indian spoken is speakers. and in over
classical a in 2014. language of It was India declared as
of comprise 91.85% population Odisha. Native in the speakers
Magadhi over originated eastern a Odia from Prakrit which years spoken ago. language Prakrit, Odra developed from in India 2,500
(1870 Odia and Odia BC century Middle till present century of Late Modern Middle Odia day). to Odia divided −1200 be (1200–1400), (1700–1870) Old Odia Odia (1400–1700), Middle (3rd language The Early AD), history can
found and 213,000 preserved manuscripts National have around in written Odia. Mission The Manuscripts India of unearthed
prominent Punjabi, about with of one 32 script Gurmukhi million is in the India written of the speakers. languages India, in
In alphabet. in spoken is people million is written Pakistan 80 it the and Shahmukhi over by
spoken areas. It neighboring is in in mainly Punjab also but
Punjab. Delhi an and It is of language official
the state most Assamese Asamiya language is Assam. in popular of or
language than million by as Indo-Aryan Eastern per Encarta. an having world estimates speakers It's 15 more
India Nepal. language an and Maithilī) to is Indo-Aryan Maithili (; native
spoken In is Jharkhand states. in India, the it widely Bihar and
Native territories National Delhi. also states Uttar found and speakers other most Capital Territory of in Pradesh the of are in India, notably and union
tongue the India, their census of was of 1.12% about total comprising It the 1,35,83,464 as reported 2011 people population In by mother of India.
Nepal, most it is In in the Terai, Nepal. language spoken second is and the eastern of prevalent
Tirhuta script Maithili. for primary formerly written was the
variant also in Kaithi. local was commonly, written Less the it of
was allows language in other government, used the to of it a and written script.In as of recognised Schedule Devanagari contexts. Today education, the Maithili in the is included in regional Eighth 2003, India, Indian be official Constitution it which
certain Language" Government that 2004, accorded status India. could requirements be of "Classical the declared languages of that the a India met of In
Over modern, for and the Malayalam (in Classical next languages of and be Bengali body made language Odia told following or other down a the Rajya and years; thus offshoots. not (in from the declared eligibility of there far have languages, Telugu may Minister considered were 2008), Classical: another for 1500–2000 classical and as laid determine 2005), period literature to status, being original and (in over literary speech its its a texts/recorded of the Culture 2008), press to history which literature/texts, 2006 a were antiquity languages criteria the (in also the several by "Classical Tamil Sabha been including few a release, Tourism forms granted 2004), Marathi.Languages discontinuity valuable Kannada demands from generations classical Sanskrit 2013), community; Language", of early (in Soni be speakers; be is between a to and tradition the High language heritage of be classification borrowed of (in later a its considered Ambika years, 2014).In ancient the distinct
November dated eminence awarded Language" to Indian international benefits Government accrue Resolution scholars as in are of India's major As will per language are: awards Classical 1 annually. the that Two a a of Languages declared No. for 2-16/2004-US(Akademies) 2004, "Classical
in for Languages is Classical Studies set A Centre of up. Excellence
certain at Universities, for Classical least the create, in requested Languages. number Languages of with Grants Commission scholars to The Central Professional of Classical to University Chairs eminence Indian be a will start in for
one languages the having native million speakers. 2001 following The more identified census than
Hindi. them grouped Most dialects/variants are under of
"mother whose single all tongue" several language has problems is different. any India choosing languages to those presents in language as use; official an
However, common recognise training people the language. across for to need education the all of one India boards
speakers complaints are non-Hindi India, trouble. that There have language North in
Indians language Similarly, difficulties that India. have to when on complaints North of there South are travelling undergo account to
take is of language(s) that not those in thought that result the follow chosen and due to incidents language, into believe chosen between the account It strongly who to everyone's do official who preferences. hear friction common those the
tensions a been commissions Local steps have direction to friction. and in various official established are taken language being reduce and
conflicts India. in rights are There over linguistic
first Tamil language of The the conflict, place official against Hindi in India. Nadu as the Nadu, implementation of took agitations linguistic the Anti-Hindi known Tamil major as of
major and Nadu. the ousting of as power this Congress consider the Tamil a and leading elimination in in total nearly bringing analysts DMK party factor to to Political
as in Maharashtra. cultural found pride based Indian other and states on Odisha, also Karnataka, Bengal, West language such Punjab is Assam, Strong
language express government, Department the Hindi Development. the various CBSE and of to of Resource Mysore, To Bureau, of people in imposition Government a result Ministry Languages, branch government of with campaigns, of ICSE of of the Education, through as central Maharashtra Class/Grade Central the the of Language coordinated Human of of the these made institutions Higher the assuage on India a Marathi disapproval attempts mandatory Institute states' state educational by Indian 10.The and its conflicts
derived in Tamil, languages such as Gurumukhi use Telugu, written is – Nagari Odia, include India from their in script languages and Assamese/Bengali, Santali scripts Meitei Most languages Mayek, few a written are Brahmi..These Indian Arabic.A derived Devanagari, in independent from scripts. own minor scripts.Various Kannada, have Eastern other.Urdu
Marathi, written Hindi, languages and Devanagari Maithili the using Angika are script.
Gujarati, Odia script, languages with etc. Gujarati Most Assamese them, written Punjabi Gurmukhi, with with script specific major are Odia with with with to (Asamiya) Asamiya, as Meitei such Bengali, Meitei using a Bengali Mayek,
Sindhi Perso-Arabic modified of versions in Saraiki are and sometimes and Urdu the script. written Kashmiri,
With this to of India. languages are exception, scripts native Indian the one
in written languages own a up languages readily which script. script taken local Kannada of printing have like scripts Tulu the these Kannada official to and that available are their its settings; have the due Kodava whereas didn't a as script had Languages the adopted
Languages Mission Sri Translation in of of of Romanization Languages in of native of India Sindhi Pakistan Languages languages List Bangladesh speakers number of List National India of endangered by Lanka languages
map with Languages, complete in Government Diversity (India) Indian Linguistic - of Himachal Languages in Indian on Languages comprehensive and at States India detailed that of India info Sister Muturzikin.com A Languages of Technology Development Scripts India the a federal offers of of Pariksha Himachal Languages India Seven Spoken for site map government Pradesh
where French as Romance America predominantly languages spoken. is Latin the or group Western dependencies Portuguese are and a Hemisphere of Spanish, such countries in
are Quebec, where is nation is to Spanish predominantly Some America. Anglo spoken, where part as such being States territories of French a or included of due spoken areas United not the the
ambiguous to Portuguese-speaking and respectively. as than Hispanic The categories or specifically America countries more is such Ibero-America which refer Spanish term
in is origin. recent more also term The
de Congreso a de The in 1856 América. the term with politician un Idea de was la America. America" used Republics" conference by an Idea Bilbao. title the Chilean "Latin Francisco "Initiative Congress Federal the (Iniciativa las Repúblicas), of first of for Federal
Americas in to Portuguese Mexico as Louisiana, military prevailed the include Napoleon by French or Guiana, III's such French-speaking justify Canada, emperor territories countries government France's larger popularised further languages the French latine French of try in Spanish term Amérique The in French involvement group to the in was where 1860s as and and
..
Including the Fuego territories, del 20 that and cover includes French-speaking America an 14 Tierra that Mexico countries from of dependent would consist Latin much territories stretches area to Caribbean. and of
Earth's 19,197,000 (7,412,000 km2 sq of mi), area almost land 13% It the has an area. surface approximately of
combined than had 2019, of 2020, of 652 US$5,188,250 and million, nominal America 10,284,588 Latin in at the of more and population was estimated As GDP a PPP a of America March Caribbean million USD. 2, and million GDP Latin
agreement of origin America. on Latin term is the the no universal There
World parts of and from that was believe in to the created Spain by 16th by whose historians to Portugal, century the the colonized geographers New term the languages Romance derive Latin. refer Some
attempt Others III, the arose Napoleon in empire in to 1860s of the a reign the during French part Americas. the France that as create term of argue
the Americas The French struggle the a be America" in race", this inhabited and a it with was affinity ultimately writing who can of whole linguistic part the "Anglo-Saxon in "Slavic Europe", Church, 1830s, Chevalier, of with itself Michel Saint-Simonian people of therefore, of a "Latin the overlapping back the Romance that part Europe", by "Latin Latin Americas the cultures ally that postulated a that the idea with as could, traced to a Europe". and has "Teutonic
of Mexico. Leddy the the Latin in of the America located French John occupation Phelan term origins Historian
the well to French used as threat the "Latin" way concept to a challenge France. counter imperialists His America imperialism, as of German to British is that argument as
American The no France. looked century, intellectuals the race" and who models, up by to and taken but was longer then rather or Latin late-nineteenth to "Latin political a of Portugal as Spain idea leaders mid- of cultural
Napoleon America" a Felix region power Spain commercial "Latin with extending political the ruler the business III Latin Viceroyalties and promoter colonies French in France emphasize of Portugal. had and the in and he of background Belly interest shared strong to French of former his called
first Mexico Latin Rojas Arturo ago and the though to This mentioned control the military the the "Latin imperialist Phelan Americas. in the opposite was Chilean Uruguayan thesis use frequently 1860s.However, of the led in Napoleon's claimed, decades projects Miguel attempt academy, two Ardao America" is proved than term and historians, to American the the U.S. Mix used was to support earlier still of failed that completely term Phelan in take
Socialist el his Génesis hallazgo (Bilbao continental, article Latin the Unión in América America: of y nombre de Libertarian Idea of socialista y Continental, and de the about Mix this a América America, latina: Latin 1986). de and of (Genesis wrote Union, libertaria" his book subject idea "Bilbao y el the 1980), Name Finding la Rojas Ardao in latina Miguel and and
the "Arturo McGuinness revealed As U.S. Transnational South in A Anti-Imperialism, America' Michel Invention and of used term Hemisphere". Mix, and Central article have 1856 into by expansion 'Latin of his History and protesting been Southern Americans Gobat already Race", [that] Rojas in Democracy, Americans the had Miguel America: "The reminds Ardao, Aims Latin
1857 Bilbao Rojas a diplomat February Ardao's French the and and in by on Spanish-language radical "Ardao in France, published poem resident Colombian a France liberal Edward summarizes a Caicedo, Shawcross by based it in a findings in politician while Rojas Francisco term identified the Mix's Mix the in 1856". 15 delivered in María intellectual in newspaper, speech following Chilean June Torres way: José located
their writing the term as la membership the by by term El identifying newspapers States, "hemispheric Clamor administration Público was local latina". América late as the Californios the latinos of and 1850s, in raza California abbreviated United under latina latinoamérica, such being and as for Now about the used in
and when "America" politician the for the "Latin" Francisco America" first were Bilbao in combined the a "Latin time in in work, conference words 1856 in was So, Chilean used by a Paris. printed term the first regarding
Federal the Congress of Idea "Initiative conference America. Republics." for The title had of the a
term Torres the writer also Americas". used year Caicedo in following "The his the José poem María The Colombian Two
a related central the in events with both played Two role works. U.S.
first USA territory. before less Mexico decade publication its lost Mexican–American Torres War, which of event the the in than Mexico and after Caicedo of works: a happened Bilbao's Invasion of a or, the third The
of were nearly Walker the year attempted the Nicaragua and affair, Franklin of abolished written: mentioned In regime a in to to second William where Pierce region. filibusters recognize explicitly for decision slavery reinstate ruled both event, the Nicaragua three already band for year by to the works, Nicaragua U.S. been expedition his Bilbao's and War established it as The and decades dangers president same Walker recently there, examples by happened Mexican-American who (1856–57) works the Torres Caicedo's American the both are and for Walker's had
Bilbao, was Paraguay geographical he concept, For "Latin Brazil, not America" Mexico. since and excluded a
for all way as the countries Both ask the territories U.S. Latin only of defend interventions. further to American also against union authors foreign their
describe the government forms and imperialism, of European the at claiming word the was politics state danger time: to countries "despotism." European rejected of countries, European of to for another return Latin same used also that the non-democratic American Both
imperialism in the of Latin French America," where to Africa, Mexican during Bilbao wrote and support work, later, countries Mexico, the against Spirit Asia, "Emancipation the in French he and Europe rejected cause another all American of Americas. Several asked the invasion years France,
just their to herself nationality, "intellectual Latin American for her freedom French protector to unable emancipation" speaks she to was: of "Hypocrite, calls that of and when, herself, intellectuals for subject claiming because race search conquer [France] she enslaves freedom all Latin France because by ideas, the it abandoning treacherous, to exploitation others regime; asked she instead!" He
imperialism the form creators place their globe. any Gobat itself America any from supporting of an Therefore, term Michel the puts in as it, other had or Latin "anti-imperial in the far and genesis," region, of were
with used opposite in the intention. term France the However, America Latin was
of way French French to invasion It of countries. Empire among countries Americas during and Mexico with include a in the III to influence by was exclude France as the Napoleon employed Anglophone the
into imply France leader of his region install in cultural area, the of and kinship of emperor Habsburg of campaign Mexican Maximilian a Empire. a the to role Second political France, It the cultural transform played with as and
French des used the magazine scholars in Pan-Latinism movement. a term La also Latines, revue dedicated was 1861 to by in races This
America territories. English-speaking Ibero-America with America"), often French- and excluding predominantly synonymously is ("Iberian Latin the used
are the Thus overseas and Belize, Suriname, French excluded. departments, countries Guyana of and several Haiti,
Republic, or generally where refers to South languages the Americas Mexico, America, Latin the Haiti, French and Central Cuba, the in Rico. territories in Dominican the Spanish, of including: and prevail, America Puerto and most Portuguese Caribbean,
as Latin and of those Empires. all Americas Portuguese once the parts part America were that French of Spanish, the therefore, defined is,
Dutch thus used Caribbean Belize); all south The is (French Americas and the Guianas Anglophone the States, to broadly including of the sometimes United (and more of the to the term refer Guiana, Guyana, Francophone Suriname), and Caribbean; the Caribbean.
the than colonialism, characterized region, history emphasizes by aspects or for a This rather formal example, socioeconomic theory). definition similar cultural which was informal of (see, dependency
for United Americas. and the as the oversimplification instead, using such, in by As some phrase the geoscheme avoid "Latin America the Nations this Caribbean" sources
is predominates: America definition, Romance and America by more and are origin, French, a language In upon and derived Americas creole literal in the these.The a distinction to convention designates Anglo-America Romance-language the the Spanish, which Latin in is where Latin) a predominant the the English-speaking based semantic close Portuguese, (a Latin distinguished. language cultures on languages from countries which based Americas languages between
other substantial Mexico, Native (e.g., languages, of area predominant, in Amerindian to portions a of culturally cultures Guatemala), cultures influence areas, Caribbean lesser and, are strong Peru, the extent, is Bolivia, Venezuela). linguistically Colombia parts – of and (e.g., the homogeneous; in highland and is American basin Neither Latin or including America African
controversy. not without The is term
length Historian the the idea of America. and at Mauricio explores Latin Tenorio-Trillo power" of "allure
going of it the vanished hardly is existed," But to "The it to ought important." here outset, with term idea theory... to the racial at "The can is it He easy America' and to declare be dead remarks something is when say, on said not obsolescence stay, have to have 'Latin of
conceptualization nations share historian him colonization. region Brazil, of has Eyzaguirre Latin do and "diluting" and Argentina the excluded Paraguay his the Jaime for same in tradition America, criticized not Chilean pattern character of Spanish who Chilean with the America) early a the the conquest Bilbao, (i.e. Following from Hispanic and that of Francisco of Latin according inclusion "disguising" term to America of writer
on Latin and geography, subdivided into several subregions culture. demographics politics, America be can based
basic Central States, America, the are the all geographical as Andean North latter America, and If United such the and the the of further Southern the states. America; Cone, defined South the Caribbean Americas politico-geographical Guianas contains of south subregions as the subdivisions
may subdivided on It and grounds America Hispanic linguistic America. French Portuguese be America, into
sovereign *: a state Not
Verde, settlement Montt The Puerto identified earliest was near known Southern at Monte in Chile.
14,000 evidence some to years disputed some occupation even occupation. is dates ago earlier of Its and there
continents. Over of millennia, course of people all spread the parts to the
first millions of were the tens home people. the and vast CE, mountains, By of coasts America's of South plains rainforests, millennium
forefathers the settlements about more culture, and Vegas the from Ecuador, a of BCE, of the are from 8000 the era. of The same Las the group Valdivia the Americas coast earliest known of sedentary BCE Culture 4600 in
formed "Muysca") as or and permanent "Muisca" settlements Tairona (or the groups. Chibcha Some such more the groups
are the in Caribbean groups These region. circum
Chibchas and Aymaras of settled most Bolivia the three permanently. Quechuas were the that The Colombia, of groups indigenous
region Maya, and The home civilizations, indigenous many Aztecs, advanced the Inca. and peoples to including was Toltecs,
later two golden Aztecs The Incas, mid-fifteenth emerging age with century of prominence early into on fourteenth 250, the and began last centuries, civilizations, the the and the respectively. Maya about great in
the in its was powerful by empire the the most invasion. Spanish ultimately Americas, part civilization The throughout until known downfall Aztec
the the such elites, the and Incas deposed co-opted and arrival as Aztecs, Spaniards With Portuguese, indigenous were the and/or of
..
who this with in alliance polity. by elite's Hernándo the power Cortés had peoples seized been subjugated Aztec
eliminated Pizarro rule Peru. in the Francisco Incan
and by the world, with line of and demarcation the which in along Both Portugal the Americas, settled of Spain rest divided them was the uncolonized colonized among 1494.
west, all and wh all areas to gave to America in the subsequently treaty lands areas east South (the Brazil). Portuguese This Spain the becoming Portugal
end from Alaska territory tips By southern the of century the Portugal of controlled to the sixteenth Spain extending and the Patagonia.
were widely introduced with with and the government populations. intermarried customs who settlers Iberian culture, local
all and Spanish religion under Catholic Religion only the Portuguese was in territories rule. The official
out the indigenous which Epidemics population. came diseases a wiped with as the Spaniards, of large smallpox such of measles, portion and
determine due of to and died the 25%. diseases, but Historians as as high some the as low European put who natives as figures number 85% cannot
records, verify. Due to are to the of hard specific written numbers lack
and work Laws slavery plantations of outlawed the forced 1542. in European was until indigenous mines the survivors to were Many of New with
was English indigenous Unlike people peoples colonies. and, in between the colonies, colonial formed very period, by Intermixing and majorities the colonists mixed Iberian several ancestry the of of common in (mestizos) end
were peoples in slaves plantations with centuries. to proceeding mines; of colonies introduced forced in and various who Americas Indigenous African were in the work along also the
of America labor system Latin The a Colonial imposed was Mita forced natives. of on the
by upheld draft and Francisco worker First receive many how was the how the based each levies that shifts on much performed. were Mita how that was large by designated Viceroy individual Toledo established (1569–1581), workers would laws money de
were how to a Mitayos—the established at Potosi of be workers—would originally before fraction assigned the number Huancavelica, and many where in Mitas reduced Toledo the 1700s.
out. several managed way offered to others Mita, While colonial villages the as payment a to administrators resist
was in for kept free through the miners, were low became though volunteers, example, Mita workers like labor exchange, place as In wages. available paid
Crown Toledo Crown it made have Mita could of had of on the Spanish the when any the established it spite ruling not gained since from of approved in practice benefits or it. the first uncertainty The
Spain in the the were abolished of violating cortes of humanitarian rights made. However, once Mita later it complaints 1812
of economic whom preferred exploitation. Kurakas; and of each as from: came native Yet complaints also methods known even other governors; leaders landowners; priests,
to from it important slaves Africa. were the group brought its the 1800s.Another the of over mention made Mita to slaves Despite fall,
slaves first The came Columbus on with voyages. the beginning his Christopher earliest from very over
other would Atlantic the by by hundred colonizers, and in the imported However Slave years, begin Spain the trade slaves, millions. delivering few
forced by large labor. Many slave productions scale the were run of
were and production, part fruit, of jobs. etc.), a sugar Mining, They multiple oil coffee farming whale (beans, other and corn, rice,
and Slaves also much more. were servants, house workers, military soldiers,
and were people such. To these property the say treated least as
jobs were and African no when compared quality in quantity to slave. slaves match of existed, Though they indigenous lack the
the population slave was known compared better slave in The United massive the to States. ownership
of the over had imported 1860 only 4 represented slaves, slave After alone which million 35% Brazil trade. Atlantic about
of of not population. Latin Despite there America, amongst reproduction in slaves as was the slaves the much number large
they rebellion. then Because subject of most African-born, the more to were were slaves
in larger trade in in history. south slave a a amongst operation crueler the the ways much longer is some however America, States well which and North involvement had known hides it United The
In the a American independence, French colony Saint-Domingue. led Latin of first gain 1804, Toussaint violent L'ouverture by to became the slave on following revolt Haiti nation
slavery. abolished The victors
in independence movements Spanish independence Haitian inspired America.
waned scene and as the global the Portuguese notably France. powers eighteenth By Spanish on of European the and century, their place, end Britain power other took
imposed of by the well as the the among the as America Latin dominance political restrictions Resentment and majority the population Spaniards over in grew social Peninsulares) institutions. of (Iberian-born Spanish the in native major government,
point, elites of Spain independence. invasion form compelling in to turning 1808 marked advocated Criollo Napoleon's juntas that a
providing Hidalgo such of by the inspiring of States, by nation the Simón José y and the New United second independence of Costilla and after the and the movement, Also, oldest Argentina, as Mexico, Venezuela of considerable munitions troops. Bolívar Martín Miguel them movement Haiti, leaders the the de newly further World San with in independent fueled
and of out advocates initial the soon authorities, Spanish for the with juntas independence. between colonial Fighting broke victories
those Eventually, royalist by Mexico by crushed year were in these early in Miguel Hidalgo the 1810. Costilla y of movements the troops including 1810,
in Venezuela de 1812. Later on by Francisco Miranda
San of had in regained a Simón by Spain. Martín America, Under generation Libertadores leaders, such for of Rico Spanish as independence except Bolívar other and strength, the Argentina, all Puerto of leadership 1825, South Liberator", Cuba, de America, the "The new gained and from José and movement independence
officer, a conservatives created of as year military de with coalition who Iturbide, constitutional liberals same a Mexico, and led emperor. monarchy, In in Iturbide a Agustín the
republic Empire of First Mexican by the This and 1823. creation in was was short-lived, a followed
other had spread along The which Brazilian regions independent through and in the already War northeastern northern, Cisplatina movements begun Independence, province. of around region,
1824, Portuguese With recognized 8, officially Portugal on surrendering 29, soldiers on 1825. Brazil the March August last
age, new became until an succession went exert liberal as of powers I a in Portugal the was reclaim 1831, the Brazilian the to of second John political both son politics, had (who turmoil absolutists Emperor heir crown, not by On National dissensions with Assembly. worn attempt 7, in way years the as regnal down the his and republican Empire's to the secession, regency of throne his conservative Portugal sides with that well five-year-old of VI, up and II).As monarch, could became set and constitutional administrative unreconciled by daughter's thus given title King of his April Dom including of Pedro he of to favor the abdicating with Pedro
In series with the the central the of of latent and absence figure peculiar and took rebellions which Ragamuffin charismatic a Sabinada, with independent during of state. Balaiada, the vast, a from Cabanagem, this the old dissatisfaction a Malê emerged the period provinces War, power, face nation a tensions represent could slaveholding the social the who newly and Revolt, as of power, the place, of localized coupled moderate
overcome regency, upheaval, which period the which the internal centered phase occurred at the Praieira of on 1841.During political revolt, only II 1840s, This monarchy, social of debate of premature end Pedro an of the in of coronation issue the slavery. last the of after was internal the with end the political and years the included was
in but result internal in coup. with with of of an years a attrition May and institution a rural of well slave ethical process long out 1889, Aberdeen slavery elites only was Atlantic officers, trade in abolished.On majority legal after 15, The monarchy and Act, stagnation, 1850, the country, dismantling mobilization by was British' as as a in financial military as economic the by worn (for formally the for of of overthrown 1888 the debate November different the reasons), and abandoned was Army
much countries, conservatism. the and and between Latin of can a conflict there American the government, be which liberalism independence between reduced was After contrasting of the to the many people ideologies
by including classes, system was it having government Conservatism social on kings. revolutions dominant of the to prior and was governing the founded
ruling away move the classes systems, see monarchs to to to and promote and change Liberalists social from equality. wanted in a
better power, the liberal off the their government by eyes before state on Guadalupe When president so, conservatists was the relied first in that Conservatives. the became government comparison, came Mexico been new the the old 1824, of Victoria in better belief into had of
succeeded. sentiment, and to control this take they pushed the of Following conservatives government, the
Santa president 1833. in elected General Anna was
lose territory United decade, amount to a The the caused (1846–48) significant the States. following War Mexico Mexican–American to of
forces the against to enraged conservative loss led liberal government. a rebellion the This by
conservative Carrera American Central separated conquered the Guatemala and 1837, In Union. Rafael from
to the countries. Central followed the disintegration the the American that The of union other of independence instability led
in conservatives. were conflict aristocrats Brazil, In urban rural with the
Portuguese Brazil's ports Brazilian control over after continued independence.
were government better, of the because the a more idea to as tended result was urbanites the conservatism Portuguese Following them presence. to old support that available conservative opportunities
gained of Gran Colombia after president 1819 region Spain. independence became Simón the from Bolívar in
military-controlled led state. He a
The much the the unhappy Citizens Bolívar: and under not did the government's too that were civilians were people in the the military with had opinion like roles, military power. position their of
of Grenada dissolution conflicts conservatives the to New After liberals. between and Colombia, continued have Gran
conservatives mountains the and each of These concentrated the Cauca. particularly in particular southern in were with Valley regions, conflicts
leaders liberal in In opposition. Caracas the mid-1840s organized some a
itself and were of countries. unitarianas conservatives and Leocadio Caracas.In and participant the (i.e. an and in conflict the some journalist war much other manifested liberals Antonio this popularity among in to analogous active aspects between Guzman movement Argentina, federalists, as a respectively in people was centralists) prolonged gained which civil
the Between of the although head a without and international relations Aires and of of debt and a given confederation, was growing over state, Manuel 1832 payment Rosas, Buenos federalist as powers hegemony de 1852, country. Juan the exerted country governor province, existed a the
country a and in constitution only republic was federal led 1860, 1853, A liberal-conservative the elite. by as reformed reorganized a enacted national in
Uruguay which (1839–1851). Guerra war blancos where were eventually achieved in pitted the its interests similar and interests resulted Montevideo, in agrarian the the colorados, against commercial After and a liberal conservative between based 1828, civil polarization Grande crystallized independence, in
colonies markets in in supply American left of Britain most the century end resources North Great 19th early of the the to Losing its of at 18th need new century.
In solve for turned America South to order this markets. the Britain resources in to Great Spanish problem, and colonies
surprise the viceroyalty a de capitol force 1806 la small British attacked Río of Plata. the in In
local in to destroyed result, attempt conquest. As capitol the British the was garrison the defend protecting a an against
amounts capture and a The before behalf the on Spanish able naval were of French King British invading took force. metals, intervened force of large down the precious to
militia the turmoil the from caused area of much in the as area viceroy. took this However, control
next a much reach again larger conquer British once Montevideo. The year the force and attempting to attacked with
but locals. in reach an Montevideo succeeded failed establishing alliance They the with to
were As British result, the a able the markets. of Indian to control take
This industries British and gained dependence network. the hindered development dominance trade world the Latin the of newly American strengthened on
trading Spain replaced Britain now as partner. largest the region's
processed Britain develop a goods. in America capital as area market significant for invested to Latin the Great
From American 1820s stagnant. the lagging early were to and economies countries post-independence 1850, Latin of the
among as to America trade Latin improvements. enhanced state such development Eventually, and led infrastructure Britain
These grew between as and countries roads Britain. the outside nations Great included railroads trades which such improvements and
(including exports USA). Europe dramatically from and 1870, attracting capital By increased, abroad
wars government 1910, 1821 the between Page various reformists established and Mexico Conservative ("Mexico Between 2)". Timeline- and through civil Liberal the battled
8, Sebastián May On and an France regarding Foreign Affairs, agreement Declarations" a called French Damas, Mexican Mexico. provisions Baron diplomat, "The Minister and between navigation commerce signed contained and Camacho, the which of 1827
this recognize independent Mexico entity. time At as French did an government the not
rule. rebels, consolidating Benito of by control It took the Juárez, liberalist led was 1861 liberal City, Mexico until that not
state whom with England, However, Spain, owed Mexico of debt effort of (Neeno). all war and a constant to tremendous the left Mexican amount of the funded France, warfare
Benito appointed of rebuilding and newly debts in to next for under suspended president, focus Mexico initiative two the stabilization government. Juárez As on new payment a years,
Spain, seize from 8, landed to England Mexico. France On debts December unpaid Veracruz and in 1861,
Intervention client in Napoleon further (Greenspan; a French to intentions economic III, powers push in establishing "French pressured Mexico…"). of his However, with other state two 1862 the interests, to withdraw
of France as Austria, Mexico. established III of Archduke under Habsburg, of and Napoleon Emperor remained Maximilian
by warfare. the to resistance French the march government, Mexican City open The resulted by in Mexico enticed heavy it
which victory of particular important they led as the to Battle of pushed offensive French point turning in the back Revolution"). Zaragoza 1862 Ignacio ("Timeline presented army Puebla The Mexican in an in Mexican the
power victory on and France's (Cinco attack against Mexico's a entire (Mexican result as national came symbolize de year to delayed City an resolve The History)). and Mayo Mexico later occupancy foreign for
by leaving Mexico, Napoleon Mexican of resistance rule the surrender, France, troops be the heavy against intervention of rebels Maximilian would forced withdraw under he from With Porfirio to States Díaz. by Mexican fear executed United later and III to where
domain American Napoleon seize expand economic Central influenced desire to III's empire region. the the decision to territorial France's over
desire interest. of to The Mexico of and Veracruz, France's port canal construct new a particular city were
textile and rocks were to East routes III's the of to Atlantic France's the precious the and economic Asian industry. Napoleon key New to expansion of World both goals Bridging mining trade
States' Mexico France the turn United in under Pacific region, over activity, collecting pretense on all Mexico's Napoleon's fear of economic the pushed New to the in influence and debt. intervene of economic World trade
and and with 1881 the ("Read to France Panama United took build until over Story"). Canal when Eventually Our construction the its in 1904 proceeded plans States began implementation
President Monroe Doctrine 1823 message was to The annual Monroe's James included Congress. in
new United any American that no countries. doctrine will nations Latin States European warns the tolerate of The colonization longer
Hemisphere. major concerns, originally foreign became Western present the in U.S. but meet the the It policy to of precept eventually drafted was
doctrine U.S. government 1865 Benito the Mexican militarily. into when and diplomatically in put president, effect was supported Juárez, The
filibuster the the allowed United involvement Doctrine when interventions, Some American Monroe William States Latin Latin America is necessary, of with U.S. case countries by aspect U.S. important the in the the of Walker. deems suspicion.Another viewed
United the 1855, In government and to he overthrow to the for land traveled the Nicaragua hoping take States.
of aid and With 56 the the himself puppet only Rivas installing as to a president. of he commander of army city followers, able take Granada, the Patricio over was declaring
when the Walker that Nicaragua; to ensure ended rigged following next he president. he presidency Rivas's the election However, fled became
much he His political did met last with countries. Nicaragua from groups in not opposition long, neighbouring presidency however, was as and
followers. repatriated who May by himself armies Navy and American United a his was to States 1, surrender to Walker coalition forced On Central him officer of 1857, a
Honduran subsequently and executed. was in by to Central the authorities Walker returned When he 1860, apprehended America
United U.S. America, Mexico the involvement Mexican–American instance that April was another war in and February lasted started The in until a and of 1848. War, States between 1846 Latin
the Rio was United of where and dispute about annexation claimed, Texas States Mexico the the and the between or border the ended the where at whether main States' in of River, The cause afterwards Mexico a Nueces United United claimed, 1845 the war ended at States Grande.
well Guadalupe Hidalgo, the cede the Peace pay up Treaty become with States and was as of Texas, that give claims United Mexico of Mexico California for would and later land the New $15,000,000. Mexico to stated was part United as negotiated all States which would between which to which
six years tensions Americans were worse with two only citizens. high between However, over by countries still and got the and next Mexican the attacks border the Native against along things raids
miles railroad situation, from land To to a United could connect the of Mexico purchase and defuse to be Pacific southern coasts. built for the Atlantic so the States squares $10,000,000 29,670 agreed
This as become would Purchase. the known Gadsden
Americas, Guam the colonial as possessions. acquiring futures in and Puerto Spanish component intervention remaining U.S. affairs Philippines, well form the critical Rico Spanish–American which the A majority by and Latin War, of of drastically affected the Cuba the the as last took of in in American
Cuyamel century and acquired banana Honduras, the United early Fruit countries Company Company amounts and 20th Fruit ancestors like land American of Central Company, (both the large In importing companies Chiquita), century, 19th U.S. Standard Costa late Guatemala, Fruit (now in Rica. of and Dole),
a The local exploited economies governments paying countries ruling their and leverage dominating by over kickbacks, in elite and gained these and the workers. companies
These banana countries called be republics. to came
1868 the years, 279,000 Dominicans, war culminated next Spain in 30 that war over suffered intervention. the U.S. against in brutal a Cubans, with for of aid independence losses and, launched a in
resulted the Americas. presence Spanish The in Spanish–American end colonial of War the in 1898
Border Honduras; with intervention of so-called the of U.S. in followed, so-called frequent Wars the Mexico. Cuba, Latin Wars the Nicaragua, and in Canal Panama War acquisition and in the Banana Zone Haiti; period Republic, Caco Haiti, in Dominican America the A with 1903,
between Americans 1914 3,000 1933. Some killed were and Latin
'harmless the as ultimate own their keep misbehavior'. press carried of Dominican Americans the 'Anglo-Saxon crusade', occupation consequences to the of an described Latin out the U.S. Republic against The
I, D. After President 1933. World in Good interventionism Roosevelt's in War policy culminating Neighbor U.S. Franklin diminished,
War entering Empire of a German the The was United the for Zimmermann alliance 1917 join proposal World diplomatic an Germany. with States event Germany the I from Telegram in against to Mexico
was The intelligence. and British intercepted decoded by proposal
American the revelation public of outraged public The contents opinion. swayed the and
to President Woodrow defend American Wilson to merchant moved them. attack submarines, against German ships had arm to which themselves started
year.The United by generate the 16, in helped telegram on Foreign the Zimmermann, April war news a States of 1917. the of Arthur of Empire, as came for support message German dispatched coded that declaration Germany January The Secretary on
the The message was Eckardt. sent to Mexico, ambassador German von of Heinrich
anticipation the warfare which by would act war. Germany telegram resumption the sent in of to on unrestricted an 1, Zimmermann presumed February of submarine Germany lead
appeared Eckardt instructed enter the for Ambassador military approach telegram he certain Germany. U.S. Mexican the a The to that proposal Government was if to the with funding war, from with alliance, a
of Southwest. in alliance, Mexico Texas As part Germany assist and would the the reconquering
Eckardt broker to Germany Mexico urge Japan. between help was and an alliance instructed to
rejected in middle after Revolution, the the Mexico, far proposal; and economically officially the the than Mexican it. the ignored weaker entered politically war, U.S., of it the U.S. militarily,
United World in a and an army it. Great country capable did not to the the Brazil needed the it States, but Britain, War more After of France, was technology which I, ally create have realized
the French In French Commission Mission Military in by 1919, the Brazil. established was
contain goal main Brazil. inner Their was the to in rebellions
did bringing missions up army constant them War European standard assist They prepare the to World them civil military for tried the but to II. by not
with to wanted allowing Brazil's Vargas, it Getúlio more countries. competitive Brazil, President, be other to industrialize
Italy, He France, act out to allies. the to and Germany, States trade United reached as
a and to thus before began Many many Brazil World years Nazi Italian German War creating immigrated influence. II people
government immigrants forces. and in positions The held armed the high
Germany States to to to and try Brazil both the neutral opposing to countries. was it could it United a continue be continued because interest for to make of sure remain place trying
Cuba that in attended of continental obligated defend if Buenos Argentina (1938); part Havana, Peru (1936); (1940) they Americas any to Lima, them and the to to be Aires, were meetings Brazil agree attacked.
Americas attacking Atlantic in once stop declaring resulting ships Germany Ocean. trading with in Brazil trading Germany started Germany to against Eventually, a the decided the blockade offshore
be soon. the they ensured attacking would also that Germany Furthermore, Americas
with submarines President they Franklin D. how Vargas States Roosevelt President met ships, the the unarmed trading Brazilian German retaliate. Once could attacked to United discuss
Italy, On officially Germany, 1942, relations with and Allies. January becoming all part a of the Brazil 22, ended Japan,
to for Force Naples, to Brazilian Italy democracy. was Expeditionary The fight sent
troops to American Latin the Brazil to Europe. send only country was
Initially, and for status high Brazil 25,000 only postwar gaining the was men Hitler's up wanted war resources for sending its Germany not to have secret a had fight.However, and chance Führer. admiration shelter Nazi it a Vargas a of that provide ended an to but to
secret forces German build Brazil. Luftwaffe around let air He even
became the States. behind Brazil's second United alliance trade with Germany This best alliance
other machine. aided war to including Nazi South escaped war recently Europeans Croats, criminals Ukrainians, who and the western found that was America, It Russians 9,000
World and to War 5,000, close 500 went perhaps Paraguay America Most, 2,000 continued the and many relationship. a 1,500 to to as and to have Uruguay.After to thought are Latin and Argentina; between have Brazil; 1,000 made to United States the to as around Chile; it rest II,
providing NGOs family areas USAID combining planning created already For example, women access place, the to in in largely America in contraception. programs the Catholic Latin
on in War response World Mexico to II entered Mexican attacks German ships.
Italian and port in renamed seized The Veracruz. an in a tanker, region in of April honor Potrero government Llano, been 1941 the by had in del Mexican originally
crippled submarine on and 13, was by It attacked U-564 German May the 1942.
killed 13 The attack of 35 crewmen.
the seized 1942, German of was crewmen. May Oro, and a 10 On 20, attacked killing by also submarine 37 U-160, Italian ship, sunk Faja de tanker, second a
and on Axis response, Manuel on the government the 22, declared May Mexican powers President In war 1942. Camacho Ávila
States nationals to Mexican through that join of the living the war came A contribution to agreement Mexico's in January 1942 an large the part armed forces. American United allowed
as many As Mexicans 250,000 in way. served this
the serve flag: de one of against In saw squadron Air Philippines sent Pelea which in the Imperial Escuadrón Japan. under the Mexico war, Mexican year war the final Fighter in Force's combat Aéreo air Mexican to the Squadron), 201 (201st the
Asia-Pacific the was the war. of to Mexico Latin-American send theatre troops the to only country
an in expanded in Bracero the States after farm the as of II Miracle. tens rapid program, armed war.World as through helped war the of the to which men were addition years of those continued hired era the workers forces, the during Mexican War in In spark Mexican thousands industrialization United decades the known and
materials spurred industry. strategic and American supplied United growth Mexico other aid than with raw more the country, States any the of
increased to Ávila President the improve credit, subsidize in revenue infrastructure, was use the able invest food, country's to wages. and raise
Staff Batista Brú war Cuba President in power Laredo as Fulgencio of belonged Chief though out real led Europe, army. the to of broke when Federico
Louis. In infamously St. entry who Havana Brú refugees Laredo MS denied arrived to aboard 900 the 1940, in Jewish
States murdered they eventually the likewise refused the United both accept the refugees, and to After in to many Europe, Canada where Holocaust. returned were
following election in of his right the president 1940. own Batista became
the cooperated Axis. closer with to He States war against as it moved United the
important and an its war Germany on 8, Italy on reputation Battle gained skill navy December a for the Japan on 11.Cuba Caribbean efficiency. in was 1941, and declared and the Cuba of and on December participant
through German convoy and navy The and hours on hostile rescued patrol hundreds of duty, the Allied ships waters, over of victims of 200 U-Boat attacks flew escorted thousands sea. from
sunk the taking of U-boats, Cuban sailors. were merchant around ships lives by Six eighty
Blanquizal. May a squadron U-176 1943, German Cuban Cayo submarine submarine chasers sank the 15, near of On
of aircraft, included through dollars bases, weapons, aid and Lend-Lease in the program, Cuba millions received training. air military which American
the the station The Panama and served other of also declared war United naval mainland attack at for convoys and Guantanamo Nazi Pearl between States a in Bay as Canal Republic base the Dominican declaration the on following States or the Harbor Germany Caribbean.The passing United and on the points US. war on Japan
military or war. the the US ships, directly Dominicans and fought however in contribute with were integrated did into troops, not 112 aircraft, It
and gun survived. was Jamaica; German off 50 from submarine the sank 3, On west torpedo U-125 killed, miles with 1 32 San rounds ship 37 1 May Rafael deck 1942, Dominican
survived. 21, submarine ship On sank Presidente German Trujillo May off 1942, U-156 were 15 Martinique; Fort-de-France, killed, 24 Dominican
abounded the fuel Rumors and U-boats water pro-Nazi during war. food, with supplying German of Dominicans
migration Jewish war region, the but There a Nazi continued. Europe parts in of certain influence from was during the
Only recognized knew the or people few a about Holocaust.
Germans. war by United numerous the some the States, Furthermore, by but the military during also were bases built
conflicts between have (1969), the war Islands second bombs of and the only since still remain.The need (1995), War World II control for with to Argentina's Cenepa Kingdom War be the safe War El United the (1982). Ecuador along international Even Honduras between made war the from and now, world with been Peru Football unexploded Falkland Salvador that
Falklands dead. 16 27 dead (88 Auxiliary, British Royal The Marines, 143 Argentines UK (including conscripted 1,188 wounded, Navy, left Fleet and 649 1 and War Royal lost 255 privates) Air the Royal 123 while Royal Force) Army,
America rate, The it Depression Great from Latin slow caused leading separating a at industrial grow to democracies.
favor development, economic the U.S. American two internal Depression of world import wars The Latin leading policy substitution and made adopt industrialization. also Latin America to countries
Countries on renewed exports. also emphasis
plants assemble Brazil other take advantage parts, some set to began countries, costs. to America's countries automobiles Latin of other labor countries selling American Latin imported letting and low up
began second-leading export world's to coffee emeralds grains gold, the and becoming Colombia and flowers, flower exporter.
to Economic the attain called that was economies States of with could or integration economies the compete Europe. United for,
American Market, American worked in economic and integration. Free toward Latin the countries Trade American Association the Common Latin with 1960s Central Starting
of countries II economic strength, America. assist to U.S. War In to Latin in regain the expense at global World the heavily involved efforts began help
were the America as goods. result stagnant war Markets previously of grew that no the a of rest unopposed their as Latin the world in needed longer
Latin long between to population like caused poor, public of the called making of countries it in an a reforms health Argentina America provide explosion economic which rich growth.Advances Large social for stunted disparity lessen has and wealth the services. the that in problem to been difficult growth,
and to middle systems the expanded, class, social poor. Education usually introduced, went but benefits not security the
a of result, the disparity increased. wealth As
development to unwilling other inflation and fund Increasing factors to poor. to help be the social countries programs caused
Argentina, harsh Chile authoritarianism and under to Pinochet, economic was in in Brazil practised response Bureaucratic conditions. in in after 1964, a Augusto
to effectively. that conviction quicken It growth investors, inflation, on curb quickly reassure the could democracy take and rested economic and measures the harsh no
Though inflation with production sharply, dropped the industrial fell official protection. decline of
Asia, countries. the and in Union, the diplomats War beginning the and II Soviet a and After waged proxy US Union Soviet these wars States Cold against America, interested became and Latin frequently Africa, in World War United between of the
sought The communism. of to stop US the spread
Cold with focused and communism sided in US were with the generally concern American Europe though America. War they Asia, period, not since US's in countries Latin the even neglected the Latin were
to Between Plan. similar of The United recipients and only received having 1946 2% Latin 1959 conditions the Marshall States of despite poor the America foreign aid main
and overthrow CIA. American the complained US the in governments governments, Latin of nationalist some the through also support of Some intervention
the passed the obsession in Security National response Council 1947, created US United Congress States's to the In anti-communism. with Security which the Act, National growing
Guatemala Jacobo holdings the of Fruit Company, United decided accepted overthrowing attacked to Guatemalan the support US in Arbenz 1954, communists when In and Arbenz. of counter-revolutionaries assist of the
for America events Allende. use including in majority the featured tactics the was the rather These than War interventionist of the of Latin the overthrow Salvador military, of used which the CIA in Cold
leading Latin achieved small even development, presence communism of by United anti-communist. communism, Latin in (r. Leónidas America.Dominican the focused Trujillo America's concerned US becoming fighting 1930–61) while the the States with issues from support economic Latin Rafael dictator was of though was on more America
Trujillo to his the New in City. murders regime multiple and committed his USA, extended tyranny York
had conduct level of not "below communists." that the Trujillo that under Republic's recognized officials civilian American the nations, recognized much long above the certainly of was Dominican
in President Eisenhower Dwight liability. But after that become seizure Trujillo Castro's had War D. of power Cold 1959, a concluded
response with Communist American to threatened to of his US In Trujillo Latin in regime. the 1960, align world and rejection
Caribe Voz the and in Dominican attacking party La the Radio terms, US began was legalized. Marxian Dominicana Communist and
Soviet unsuccessfully to establish with Trujillo also relations contacts Bloc. attempted and the
was Trujillo weapons 1961, In by with supplied CIA. murdered the
facto the armed Trujillo, position son, as his of remained dictator's in government the the the commander forces. six months of through control de for Ramfis next
and Jose President Trujillo, plot Balaguer. Arismendi brothers, the to began returned Trujillo's to and Bienvenido against Hector immediately country
planned Trujillos Republic. a more coup On 18 United the a idle" over States Dean the Rusk attempted became US Secretary 1961, "remain November warning that domination" not of dictatorial as issued evident, if to "reassert the State would Dominican
naval of with Following warning, $200 US of arrival fourteen-vessel treasury. and task Ramfis on Dominican this Santo 19 the the million and country November uncles his a fled from the sight force Domingo, within
and was afflicted corrupt 1959, that Cuba Castro By first in and with Batista year the a set hemisphere. state ousted under Fidel communist dictatorship up the Batista,
economy. trade the this a The combined and States private enterprises, Cuban to of detrimental on Castro's was expropriation Cuba, United with imposed embargo
example. the Latin by inspired and conflict increased, Around guerrilla urban terrorism Cuban America, rural
by The by operations John put these Latin through for down American launched counter-guerrilla President in rebellions United the F. countries Progress Alliance their Kennedy. States supporting
to thrust This be successful. appeared
by but in became was military Chile Allende, three in United Marxist, president of later coup overthrown 1970, the a backed Salvador A years States.
instability, eventually crime civil war, political socialist liberal adopted Cuba most democracies Despite high its countries American system. while Latin maintained and bourgeois
support by to in decided the the the coup attack d'état, Cuba anti-Castro Encouraged 1960, success Guatemala in of Guatemalan rebels. by an U.S. 1954 on
of in The of Pigs financed invasion by Cuba was 1961, through unsuccessful U.S. to Bay the Castro. CIA, Fidel the invasion overthrow an
be very The failure the of alliance. proved Kennedy the to incident administration.The invasion new for Soviet-Cuban to embarrassing led a
America. for to John establish Latin President initiated the cooperation 1961, between the and U.S. in Alliance F. economic Progress Kennedy
reform The and in Alliance provide for billion would America, counterinsurgency $20 Latin measures.
the understand it that the of because could failed simplistic who the guided theory lack of Latin Instead, reform experienced customs. experts American American and
C-56 transport Dominican June aircraft town began on fifty-six landed overseas of Armed of of 14, invasion intervention with at Constanza. the 1959 of Cuban an by the men, who a a the airport Republic military group
surrounding the disappeared with Dominican into mountains. the garrison began their Upon an ongoing landing, the until invaders, gun battle the survivors fifteen-man
the Air Vampire unsuccessful area Dominican attempt instead jets Constanza bombed made Immediately which with around in Force British invaders, civilians. the to killed an after, kill the
military the invaders of them. captured, and imprisoned either died at peasants, hands tortured, the or machete-swinging The
coast. yachts offloaded the landing week launches later, onto north A Chris-Craft invaders on for a two 186
Dominican their into launches, killing most jets Air the of rockets fired Force approaching Vampire pilots invaders. from the
murdered. The brutally were tortured and survivors
troops notably security until Venezuela, numbers the in Vietnam.South Soviet it government late due nuclear and the Syria, countries capabilities, that of most Cuba the anti-imperialist upgraded threat to world, countries saw by Cuban the as Africa, of such several of 1966 and the Bolivia, Angola struggles large military the Africa posed across independence in its with the developed 1980s, Castro From to presence southern Cuba's Mozambique. Angola weapons Algeria, struggles and of assisted Mozambique and and to
1975, In history. of into in the mobilizations more military November in poured Cuba Angola 65,000 troops than one fastest
Cuban Liberation Quifangondo. Battle in Angola the forces of the Front 1975, defeated On November of (FNLA) National 10,
cars of cross seven and soldiers. bridge, upwards the On banks as 90 the 1975, South along November tried attacked, the Cubans hidden to Force river a Defence African armored killing of 25, enemy destroying (SADF)
troops 27, the from withdrew South March 1976, last African Angola. On
Cuban In flights president conducted strafing Plata to intercepting over or returning Puerto Republic against Angola. to headed warn from MiG-21s 12 1977, warships in September Dominican then Joaquín Balaguer
In to vengeance. Cuba with 1988, returned Angola a
against began Angola. rebel an army in national by The movement pro-Western in troops with crisis 1987 the southeastern assault Soviet-equipped UNITA
stalled. SADF US-backed the beleaguered faction support invaded the Angolan Soon, to and the offensive
prompting with ally and to its call Cuba MiG-23s, 55,000 up reservists. artillery troops, tanks, African Pretoria reinforced 140,000
FAPLA-Cuban Cubans. 290 killing Techipa, 10 artillery SADF June engaged In and Angolans armor at and 1988, forces
troops. African warplanes In Cuban retaliation, hammered South
both sides hostilities. quickly pulled of back an avoid However, escalation to
stalemated, a Cuanavale was treaty of The Battle and Cuito 1988. in signed peace September
was War from intervention. policy and foreign two shifted away Cold Cuba's over years, military the Within
part to the Somoza Banana until as during in family dynasty the occupation would and Wars, power, 1912, the Revolution. ouster political of 1979 Following American the of rule in came Nicaraguan their Nicaragua Nicaragua
and military its corporations. rule family government by a well U.S.-based Somoza on as for multi-national era as was U.S. strong characterized support of reliance the The heavy
National Front and dictatorship 1960s in Nicaragua Revolución Liberation which the to 1981 was campaign to waged Contras govern (FSLN) FSLN efforts by 1978–79, Contra the 1970s, Sandinista) Revolution rising FSLN dictatorship and the to the Revolución or (Spanish: 1990. the oust the War The violently the Popular and to of Nicaraguan Sandinista Nicaragüense the from between encompassed 1979 until 1990 in opposition subsequent Somoza the led the the from
one war country the significant revealed events international battlegrounds proxy War marked a and of The the period history of with attention. Cold Revolution rising the the in the in as Nicaraguan country major to
took subject lives bloody thousands overthrow the of tens regime of Although 1980s the Nicaraguans of the of the Somoza in War affair, debate. initial 1978–79 fierce Contra international was of and was the of a the
collection collection Contras of FSLN 1980s (respectively, Cold from the of the of political counter-revolutionary (a the rightist parties) amounts and leftist (a War the both super-powers States). large the aid During Union groups) the received Soviet United and
were of "standard" were Fund as during the the institutions reform World the Washington, countries considered US Bank, International policy Department D.C.-based set crisis-wracked 1980s economic and the such Treasury of (IMF), package the promoted prescriptions Monetary that and developing by 1990s. specific for The
to In led several adopted) to by the countries Consensus policies. socialist – (and some – policies recent have campaigned Venezuela degree for including Washington American wing Latin of governments or left set other and contrary years, Argentina
adopted policies.) governments Latin and (Other Peru, left, have Brazil, bulk with the Chile including countries the the Mexico, in practice of of
described calls and US Fund Monetary have "one Treasury Fund a of of International critical such Monetary who are for individual some "fundamentalist" Joseph Dani challenged actually promoted Stiglitz Also policies the all" have by sometimes as what of International Stiglitz US the and as economies. Rodrik, fits economists, size the the the been policies as what treatment
become sovereignty. policies of and the state, neoliberal national influence the role on into and The broader the with over associated countries' other the constraints term debate US has upon market, expanding general in free drawn
series This 1994 initiative like America agreements. was and through in Americas of North by a elsewhere institutionalized NAFTA, the politico-economical in
the Free of Americas. 4th American was project, comprehensive Area however, of 2005 Americas Trade by most countries Summit at the The rejected the South
In have political 2000s since risen the power. countries, to left-wing parties most
power are anti-imperialists Tabaré a presidencies in opposition socialists, Mujica El in and Latin and region). Funes Bolivia, Chávez coup Fernando declare towards Ecuador, Nicaragua, Silva Dilma Salvador Evo Zelaya Americanists, Lagos implying and in part (removed Rousseff themselves Ricardo Bachelet Uruguay, Cerén The wave Chile, left-wing Michelle Rafael Paraguay, his Vázquez Honduras of in in the Salvador Mauricio from and in da Ortega Daniel politicians Brazil, Manuel all in by Cristina often and wife Argentina, in d'état), of Kirchner US of or who Fernández Morales Correa in this policies Hugo José to Lugo (often Lula Sánchez Néstor Venezuela, in in
Our América) for "The Pueblos (Spanish: the los already of this the been Nuestra Peoples Alliance Bolivarian of A creation eight-member some Alianza alliance, or ALBA by has Bolivariana mentioned. para the countries America" of the development de of
governments. right-wing 2014, Martinelli) Pérez Orlando Hernández), Honduras By (Otto had Molina), Panama June Guatemala and (Juan (Ricardo
In "discredit" that obligations, its that could payment crisis it throughout American would announced foreign the economies Latin Mexico 1982, inaugurating a not decade. debt debt meet
debt the lead region. would social neoliberal to would This in reforms many crisis that instigate movements
living of lower and economic America, industrial "reversal and the thus, seen in classes. reigned over falling declines standards growth, development" middle A production, negative Latin through for
that informalization policies goal of their over and neoliberal industries previously privatization made new security, national financial Governments policy security implemented of labor. enacting primary economic social
economy. more with international an the these bring more open embraced globalization through investors effort these interactions to governments also to industries, In
society. the to elite government trend exclusive the a much Significantly, spread became social of as groups democracy proved to ventures movements), of that inclusive Latin within few conducive economic America, remained realm across (a more
rights, Neoliberal projects to though upward responsibility increased. political redistributed restructuring while the income development and place poverty welfare social throughout consistently and both region, inequality denying provide took
excluded Feeling their ownership movements of in from the new Latin classes these a own social lower America. through projects, of took democracy revitalization
voiced and Both in trends above as of global result the economic a had serious mass and populations rural grievances and urban have them demonstrations.
the the in of Caracazo services, Argentinazo the these have against such largest as protests and in in Argentina. and urban violent Some of been most Venezuela cuts
insufficient concerns, restructuring, projects diverse movements to and demands land hands indigenous have displacement environmental means of and related Rural unequal at development distribution, agricultural neoliberal made and livelihood. dams, of the
transnational support INGOs. benefited and from These conservationists have from considerably movements
American social perhaps The largest (MST) Latin Movement contemporary Landless Workers of the movement. is Rural
rural, indigenous rebellion Quechua in communities Guatemala, region indigenous of indigenous in of movements, pan-Mayan Panama, peoples organizations Bolivia, Amazon Mexico, Confederation Altiplano movements the are of peoples Ecuador primarily portion of mobilization social Zapatista the the Aymara for groups the Bolivia. Indigenous large and of Amazon, account rural peoples and including indigenous a Yanomami in by in populations and the Kuna As and (CONAIE), Ecuador in in Nationalities
Mayo is gender-based such the de strikes, issue Plaza in Mothers Argentina women and movements struggles and recovered as women's in well protests as include Other movements largely against of draws as a on which the factories maquila labor. production, social of how cheap because types significant labor such for of Argentina, as it
American positive The economies. caused Latin effects many 2000s commodities for boom
increasing in recession economic boom the some the of or trend relations end commodity Another importance resulted is with the rapidly stagnation China.With countries. in the of 2010s, the
support. a Pink lost Tide of left-wing the governments the result, As
severe social The upheaval. and is facing was worst-hit economic which Venezuela,
the scandal across region's The Car raised corruption (see allegations corruption Brazilian a Odebrecht, conglomerate, has of of Operation Wash). governments
ring in has The scandal largest history. the bribery become Latin corruption American
Ollanta presidents and were 2017, ranking the Lula politicians Luiz As July Humala (arrested) (arrested) da Toledo fled Silva (fugitive, Inácio former of US). Brazilian highest the to Alejandro and charged Peruvian President former
The America. list the a Latin largest ten in of is following metropolitan areas
The most ethnic Latin America of inhabitants in world. making one of the are a groups, diverse of and of region races, variety the the ancestries,
to referred a dominated have in primarily commonly countries' some Mestizo on country Amerindians depending Mulatto. The a of composition varies others, from population; to European European-Amerindian predominance are are majority; the ancestry; of admixture, specific are country: by and or some Castizo or populations as more inhabitants some
black, (mixed regularly. minorities and and black Various also Amerindian) are identified Zambo Asian
such division racial by the was distinction combine meant Aske: to in and largest ancestry at ancestry, along Before single of they European became more.According U.S., approximately the and make to one of adhered the 80% even the the African to people culture major the 'noticeable' according that person was between with part-European Black. drop rule large, the ancestry group, to one-drop population, up Hispanics usually group the of or black with People a white and Jon are
...
of and America. ethnicity, of the notion a other separation color) racial (or continuum in skin of and Latin race norm is most the hand, The on
or hundreds the the Spanish had peninsula. in empires, to of Africans of was Iberian miscegenation the Spanish In years with something grown Portuguese the mixing during the accustomed Portuguese North Arabs and norm and and rather and racial contact that
well. have as inevitable made this demographics But, may
million in example, people Spanish fifth Thus, white. 1800 for were who the lived independence about before only the in of colonies approximately one 13.5
were free with more 1801, slaves, of blacks). 60,000 a where than four-fifths million were population U.S., the 900,000 approximately contrasts of plus whites 5.3 This (out in
...
as recognition mean which racial there race, was, (sic) discrimination, wasn't fact there or they were sometimes wasn't not of American or a of called. continuum The does 'castes', Hispanic there obsession an in that that the with
...
areas which In Amerindian mestizos a Central most a and mixture in America. South known populations, racial as in resulted, who indigenous majority Mexico, large ... of America with are Spanish is
left, English, produced Caribbean were population them was those Spanish-speaking mulatos mixed of ... many was or also written Caribbean brought there between Similarly, to Spanish colonization who indigenous presence majority little Republic, of a the of population that: the Dominican and where Rico, later basin unions Puerto from British, African region Venezuela).Aske a when Brazil, in are North (Cuba, Spanish Colombia, different very and slaves has colonization of America. and rather countries
of systems colonization They methods different and of different had subjugation.
land's in religious peoples. which had of English into While was and mixture the were something conversion of primarily in land, indigenous incorporate the achieved by society, which unions a their a a to and 'race' grabbing interested sexual mandate inhabitants mestizos, produced Spanish new addition the Europeans
much population of form majority and Central (sic) the in of South the America, Mexico, mestizos America.
hundreds something Spanish with that miscegenation, the Arabs Racial or contact had was Portuguese to and all, during been North the after accustomed of of and mixing Africans. years
when well Republic, Caribbean are Antilles) the Caribbean of Rico), in Central majority region (Colombia, (Cuba, Venezuela areas African Puerto parts population later a on, basin slaves into of mulatos, of and unions as a the population between (the the region, Caribbean islands produced the were Dominican them of and Spaniards introduced coast). Similarly, American as Caribbean the other who
countries, British mestizos their not Americans mulatos citizens in but blood Black taboo (sic) or Amerindian way interracial outcomes the to and class one in of first was person and in 'impure'. Europeans were were were disowned drop of the colonies, the the always of unions Native have make never and may enough they have marriages been where
his The and Portuguese William 1963 proportions that: of Racially wrote mixed in varying of Negro America, and most the Spanish West, societies Hardy in Rise Indian, strands. from famous In European, arose compounded McNeill book
to remedy as and positively Catholic the women resort sexual immorality. immigrants mitigated between white those and encouraged in the hardships Indian frequent Fairly marriages for of church areas; manumission slavery a
the importation Negro islands, English more southern in slaves society. a polarized the sharply and the Caribbean of most much biracial created in colonies of However,
servile intermarriage, not the feeling practically legally. nearly if interdicted all Strong status and of race Negroes
Such did prevent of discrimination to of assigned not status but their interbreeding; the were mixed mothers. parentage children
half-breeds and Indian were white from Mulattoes thereby the excluded community.
of more with and discrimination (and, principle established some In Portuguese) racial Spanish less territories a itself. elaborate oppressive differences,
French of ranged as in English, when, labor, inpenetrable the turned colonial purely the persons the from European Africa prestige; that: numerous came no become who the more beneath Negroes whites in dividing social meanwhile, in been to that and America C. blends next complex the pyramid as while in born did homelands and declined, colonies.Thomas of handful had written makeup as claimed Latin has could Haiti one Spanish, native The the to of descent; meant racial form the North became social those demographic and racial Dutch, The topmost population British for barrier French ugly that various America. as a whose Wright, Portuguese, distinctions
reveals even that varied. casual peoples the that a then, characterizes the outcome different States, United by of of is shared tricontinental America, has Latin examination The the heritage but interaction complex
than three less have in common it America, been to among races Latin While occurred North the in much certainly appears miscegenation America.
distinct were recognized Latin racial categories belonging they to not liaisons such as America as in offspring America. in North Furthermore, new, of were
mameluco, the categories and subcategories racial in America black, interracial mestizo The established activity Indian castas, unrealistic States. outcomes identity of mulatto, continuum a term and race rather or absolute of or frankly terms the of United Latin of used of than the sexual general in dozens white, as the recognized
list allow individuals forms Census than until U.S. did more one to 2000.) (The not Bureau's race
language is Spanish Latin the of America. predominant
is by spoken language first about It as the of population. 60%
English, about languages Italian. and Dutch speak Nahuatl, spoken as languages, Guaraní, by Portuguese is such and 10% other about French, Quechua, Mayan Aymara, 30%,
region. the biggest Portuguese in most Portuguese), populous spoken and only in country the (Brazilian Brazil is
is mainland in well rest the English), Rico countries (where the as Cuba, of Latin Puerto as Spanish territories language the in (Spanish the with is language of the and Americas), Republic. and it American of most official co-official on Dominican the
French departments of Martinique the Guadeloupe, in French Guiana. overseas Haiti and and spoken in is
of is Afro-Antillean also by spoken descent. Panamanians It some
in Netherlands is official Dutch Antilles. language Curaçao, the Suriname, and Aruba, the
Latin necessarily Germanic territories not are Dutch a considered language, is these America.) part (As of
largely Bonaire, Dutch has Portuguese Curaçao, Papiamento, is languages. creole and native from a the However, and Aruba, influence a language of on and the language creole based language and coming Spanish Portuguese-based considerable
and Mexico, Brazil, Bolivia, Peru, Amerindian other degree, widely Panama, a Colombia, languages to lesser amongst Guatemala, Venezuela, and and countries. spoken in Chile in Paraguay Argentina, are Ecuador,
of not non-existent small languages speakers named Uruguay). (e.g. of to indigenous very tend countries population In even Latin American the be or above,
variety country spoken country, that Latin any languages contains is American most language than the possibly Nahuatl. indigenous wider but of a the is Mexico only
areas language, alongside they other Spanish official where predominate. and In Peru, indigenous the any an is in Quechua language
no holding Quichua language recognized few it only by while country's the related In is highlands. Ecuador, the however, groups status, a the indigenous the country's of under people constitution; official a spoken is in closely
Guaraní and Spanish. Bolivia, status alongside Aymara, Quechua In hold official
and official province along with of the co-official a by is is Argentine majority most bilingual), population an of Spanish spoken Paraguay, Spanish, is with Guaraní, the and are, part, it language of in (who for Corrientes. the
Rama but official also In coast indigenous Sumo, as the language, country's is such and languages hold and Spanish Caribbean Nicaragua, official English Miskito, the on status.
fewer spoken within than native population territory recognizes all languages its of indigenous are Colombia though of languages. 1% its as speakers these official,
recognized government "national native languages" Mexico, officially which the as in one are 62 languages Nahuatl indigenous by is with by Spanish. along spoken the of people
in Argentina; and Argentina.Yiddish countries Chile, not in around heard southern Argentina, well considered portions Other Venezuela Russian Argentina, nearby Chile; Puerto especially. descendants southern in Aires and include: are groups and Rico, settlers like and Belize Hebrew spoken by Ukrainian, or spoken that and Polish in Brazil English, as be southern Latin languages by and of European Paulo of may as & Guyana, in Welsh, in São Brazil, British be and some Buenos Brazil, Paraguay; Latin and America to possible German, Argentina in Italian, American, may in Uruguay; and Venezuela, southern
Bolivia, and include Paraguay, Paraguay, South Peru, Arabic Brazil, throughout Chile, Brazil, Argentina, in Chinese Venezuela, languages America. and Japanese Korean Brazil, in and Asian Non-European Chile, in Colombia, or and Argentina,
several especially the languages creole are region, spoken. In in nations, Caribbean
widely is in derived Amerindian, predominant and Haitian African well. Caribbean and most Latin America tongues influences language is from spoken the Creole, Portuguese the with creole and The it Spanish of as language West French English, primarily Haiti; certain
similarly, languages mainland derived African and of European America, languages Latin tongues. from various are Creole
mostly along Belize the language people of Garifuna Caribbean mixed who between escaped slaves. in race Black Garifuna and the by Zambo Honduras, spoken mixing coast Guatemala, the result a people Nicaragua were and is Indigenous Caribbeans The
languages. it and Caribbean Primarily European an language, Arawakan from has influences
from systems have distinct mesoamerican 15 deciphered societies. Archaeologists over writing pre-Columbian
orally. passed confined elite, and traditions largely administrative the were since most down the Maya to sophisticated had but texts written the textually were language, religious ancient
also oral Paraguay in Aztecs groups including, the Mapuche the Brazil, Nahuatl limited indigenous and Tupi-Guaraní in America, Guaraní in regions, speakers, Quechua major other Central traditions and prevailed the Chile. to of the Quiché in the but and today's other Andean the Aymara not of
belonging Latin Roman Christians the are (90%), Latin mostly of Catholics to vast majority Church. The Americans
70% Catholic. the Latin of population About consider themselves American
terms population 2014, absolute population, survey of and 69% largest Latin American multi-country Christian is constitute Europe.According is the the world's in Latin 19% Protestant. in detailed after second to the Pew America Catholic
over Central of 40% are Protestants much Brazil in in and 26% America.
Roman these half than converts More are of from Catholicism.
and immigration net to social Due is change the are economic, affecting net focus to security from in that developments now recent the emigration. the decades, region
live States. in 10 the United million Mexicans About
the 2010, with the or 600 and levied 31.7 the Peru 16,500 ancestry which wars, 1600s, stage roughly the were Mexican Spanish as in Mexico colonize and were of together fight from Philippines. of million officers cities the soldiers around about Americans and the presidios Spanish initial to population.During sent settle, as their colonization Philippines build 10% listed of of
people. 16,500 Malay which Peruvians 667,612 then the reached and These Population Native Mexicans supplemented
had genes group Philippines. populated among This Latin founders their soldier-settler spread the of sparsely initial American
evidenced resulted Latin of Native a American of ancestry. number large admixture American spread a among Filipinos into as by possessing This Filipinos
possess the of the "Applied origins.Furthermore, organized to island the holds across of that American (Which according from sampled country German Philippines) Biosystems" A Filipino and conducted of found a dated Latin and Genetic Jagor of survey Latin the Male Population half 1/3rd ethnologist from people Luzon Company population Spanish 13.33% the varying by 1870 had Y-DNA degrees of of of compilation Fedor American Y-DNA the ancestry. by Spanish the citizens
overseas estimated number about census Colombian currently According 2005 at about Brazilians 2 people. to is or DANE, living million of Colombians the 3,331,107 live abroad.The
reside two to United estimated An million States. in 1.5 Salvadorans the
gone mainly States Ecuadorians abroad, the to 1.5 and At Spain. least United million have
mostly live the 1.5 in Dominicans United million Approximately States. abroad,
1.3 States. More live abroad, them Cubans million of United in the most than
States, Australia live and Argentina, is over 800,000 in United It abroad, that Chileans mainly estimated Sweden. the Canada,
to An Brazilian the 700,000 Argentina immigrant and United were Japan population. as Japan's 2004, estimated numbered immigrants constituting in Bolivians living States.Japanese 250,000 in 33,000 of another second-largest 2006 in
who foreigners. Their income by jobs to similarities of low experiences immigrants, often Japanese are those relegated Peruvian to occupied bear typically
terms Chile, living countries Earthquake migration a were Venezuela the period a Central migration its Salvadorans, impact, of of were Haitians Nicaraguans, were 3,314,300, Hondurans, their and 414,955 to were rates, only Haiti Guatemalans, and of and Ricans.For result was averages.As Panama, were in Costa in abroad positive 685,713 were yearly 2005 significant 683,520 Rica, social 2000–2005, Costa global 2010 the there 127,061 Americans with other countries. economic the American were which of 1,128,701 and Panamanians 215,240 were Latin
Chávez countries seek quality the links life of over America during fled migrants the states to refugee his as origin, successor their and 3.2 Maduro, and promoting presidency Venezuela in Latin Venezuelan of conditions crisis and between Hugo while Nicolás of receiving state. strengthen people their worsened.The the the During integration of million socioeconomic
of the origin. outside country These citizens who participation on Policies the and obligations opportunities live of for borders the emigrated Emigrant of already focus rights,
in the that focus is linked extension on recipient state policies on rights and influence to Research countries. Latin a positively benefits civil of can shows migrants towards America integration that
in region other citizenship Latin dual America of the than has tolerance of any spread the world. more addition, in In
Despite unequal school remains access in progress, Latin education and America. completion significant
almost made has region considerably. has primary progress great and school in attend secondary children educational increased all education coverage; to access The
and poor exist the throughout of equipment such appropriate issues teaching region. lack methods, Quality overcrowding as
educational dropping early. adolescents These of lead out the issues system to
enabled services institutional to for Most early and the the places administrative reach 1990s. in had and reforms education that of educational communities have types region in implemented access systems have no various that
generations, increase of Latin prior youth Compared an American to seen education. their levels in have
schooling million the two years in education system. the region have On outside the than between and of more they 4 average, there still children formal ages 23 completed are of parents.However, their 17
age rural, the of not calculation 30% indicate attend vulnerable 40 populations, and do that Estimates for poor most preschool children percent. exceeds this 4–5) the (ages school, and
5 system. 6 to almost is to incorporate need 12), primary (ages age Among million education however school there a children coverage children universal; still is the primary in
between 17 full-time are secondary poverty.Among advance Afro-descendants people and in the indigenous ages to years, them among areas, 13 system; only 80% live and school. These children education are remote live in 66% the students only mostly extreme or in of
school. attend groups: 17 13 only and are ages of between percentages of the among 75% youth the lower vulnerable years These poorest population
outside lowest only of system. Tertiary the 70% 18 years between education people of and the ages coverage, has the education of 25 with
more income children Currently, education. low in rural or fail of complete areas nine half than living of years to
America cited in dangerous most the have been by the Latin to world. sources numerous be and Caribbean regions the
Latin cities. America the shown contains dangerous have world's majority most of that Studies the
crime say to they reason in an that inequality has attribute region, culture growing rate and income such the inequality criminal social within crime is region and due social the is to region. Many the analysts why alarming the fueling largely
addressed. prison will is between be the that the resolved poor and Many crisis not rich until the the gap agree
for are and citizens and region. important violence security and America issues governments in now prevention Latin public Crime and Caribbean the
the the highest America in rates Latin are Homicide in world.
increased percent. early through the From 50 rates the by 1980s mid-1990s, homicide
2000 more 2.5 and murders million than Caribbean the Latin and experienced between 2017. America
young are of 19 69 old. years and a victims such between murders 15 total were 2018.The the of of 63,880 percent in major men, in There homicides are whom Brazil of ages
Guyana per Grenada Barbuda the Panama 12, Ecuador as inhabitants Nicaragua 11, Honduras highest Trinidad 109, Countries and and with 34.4, 16, 34, 13, Lucia of and year were: 22, Haiti 57, 19, Guatemala 43, the Jamaica rate 12, Republic Belize Colombia 31, 26.5, 12, Rica 22, 26.7, Kitts Brazil Antigua St. Bolivia 2015 100,000 10. 13, per Venezuela Dominican 30, and 34, 16, Rico Mexico Tobago Costa St. Salvador Nevis homicide Bahamas the 64, El 11, Puerto
top the Latin countries and America. highest homicide the with are in Most of rates Africa
50,108, in homicides more list Countries top in the globally. America, Salvador world, one overall like any 10 Honduras, for Central and the homicides than accounting in country the in world.Brazil El has of at
more HIV/AIDS threat public in health, infectious the than violence represents other most Crime-related Latin America to diseases. victims striking or
2015 per 9. as 100,000 Chile inhabitants year and homicide 8 of 3, 7, Paraguay lowest rate Argentina Uruguay Peru with 7, were: per Countries
Japan, Brazil of largest be emerging BRICS United economies 2050 Kingdom, will China, by follows: world review to the in India, and economies, Mexico. Goldman States, as Sachs' Germany, the According United
Latin average. around fluctuated per centuries, past America's world GDP the Over has capita two
gap is Latin and substantial However, between economies. there America a developed the
Inca the In capital gap times. low in be this among region Pre-Columbian Indios human can Andean a of consequence
the just is was value of the evident the Portuguese. half numeracy of early It Spanish century Indios Peruvian numeracy the of that and 16th in
2008, and times. 2.7 0.8 to from 1820 this widened Between gap
also Since versus the America growth average. world Latin lost 1980,
grown at pace nations as have in others path, joined to 1980 such and economic a in its declined has America output Many of Latin Asia world 2008. those on rapid but growth 7.8% from 9.5% share slower in
the highest Latin world. the with is the region levels in income America inequality of
measurement index, living all of America of based of Latin per GDP Index, through under in expectancy, countries at poverty the a parity measurement Index. on extreme the lists Human day, dollars measurement Global safety The of Peace table inequality through life measurement Human through Index, 1.25 Gini a purchasing the following rates poverty power Poverty indicating people the the valuation a capita, murder and of country's Development
the indicates the lowest. while Green each performance cells indicate category red best in
Caribbean the America decade. indicators in growth past issue Latin and serious over despite remains social strong improved Wealth economic inequality a the and
Economic in UN Inequality Social entitled released by report A Affairs Department Matters. the and of 2013
in landholders likely as and income.’ distribution may Situation, of social in Social labour to ‘Declines labour frequently attributed a to rely general a the has productivity, the impact lack and so. been to they ‘highly-unequal World land to that: share on and source resources to market do incentive labour-saving the that individuals economic the of access enough the weakening not political have addition, noted tensions owners of have and observed the of mostly middle disproportionately, distribution credit increase wage since and declines are report affect of income inefficiency, is institutions. bottom had while In Report other technological to small change regulations Such big created and
Alliance blocs the major region and Mercosur. agreements) (or trade The are in Pacific the
Free or Free trade Dominican Agreement the G3 Community Minor Nations Trade Caribbean Central (CAN). Trade and Agreement, agreements the blocs of the Andean (CARICOM) Community America Republic the are – (DR-CAFTA),
from Paraguayan reconfigurations the approaches (pending G3 both However, formally integration from been to and major has are opposing taking the admitted withdrawn Venezuela along Mercosur the ratification has and trade; into it legislature). and officially place CAN
intentions has his of path. The president-elect manifested Ecuador the of following same
bloc Trade nominally manifested Agreement Uruguay Free its intention has the This otherwise. with States, opposes United although any (FTA)
Latin and Trade Chile, the four Canada, Free North the nations of American with are United Agreement an FTA American Mexico both States have (NAFTA). Colombia members only Peru, that and the
of American cultural is Latin many mixture expressions worldwide. culture a
It cultures European Indigenous of the who influences: the diverse is inhabited the to prior many of Colonization. product people continent
social advanced systems. their developed and political, own civilizations Ancient religious very and
Mayas, Aztecs of are the and these. examples the Incas The
dance, and traditions very foods, Indigenous crafts, America. in clothing, are music, in Latin arts culture legacies and strong folk
such like taco, terms pampa, effects and on as tamale, Linguistic Portuguese marked, Spanish also cacique. in are
by centuries. of particular culture brought and 16th between was powers 19th the the and French in Western Portuguese colonial – civilization, the mainly the – Europe, Spanish,
influence Catholicism. language enduring is most The and colonial Roman European
recently, latter. States from on and to and the during the from additional world nineteenth immigration came centuries, the the United former cultural twentieth influences and the More of influence Europe the growing due stage
the United of in Latin territory. States influence is American America, strong particularly northern an especially Puerto The which is Rico,
was fought Cuba, a States. for United also close in have American soldiers its relation who with socioeconomic to independence along War, Spanish–American 1959, Prior the known to the
(the in Zone. Panamanian and Colombia control transoceanic from restored Torrijos-Carter Treaties the Canal Panama traffic in Zone the built to when which In 1914) opened an Panama the 1999, state of held States helped independent United the Canal Panama twenty-mile-long also freight from addition, to become Canal 1903 Panama
Germans, South of of Austrians, Europeans, experienced Poles, Spaniards, Croatians, and French, Italians, immigration Dutch, especially Jews. Russians, Portuguese, Ukrainians, waves America Ashkenazi Lithuanians
exert science the in also medicine. culture, the French high in Latin a colonialism, With was influence realms to direct able of especially and America, of culture end
countries in France the any seen after in region's and French the to of Enlightenment science literature of after of be French This including music, can territories ideals the and 1791. and number the in the of realms decriminalized homosexuality politics.Due painting, revolution, expression traditions, artistic a in Iberian-American and impact certain Americas
of the (1887), (1871), Peru in Argentina interference century sodomy Some abolished (1899), any Guatemala countries Dominican or the El Brazil Salvador. Paraguay were consensual in sexuality Honduras banned adult to (1880), (1824), (1836), and 19th (1822), reference Republic laws Mexico state that
same-sex overseas is Mexico. in as Argentina, Uruguay, Ecuador, as Rica, several and legal Colombia, in of marriage departments, Brazil, French well Costa states Today
can held unions in be Chile. Civil
African presence whose World slavery. a long history derives of from New cultures,
the the of ethno-scapes descent Latin African Peoples influenced Caribbean. and of America have
religion, Dominican especially in Venezuela, Puerto This dance and for Brazil, countries manifested Panama, Costa Republic, in instance Rica, Cuba. and is Haiti, Rico, Colombia, like music,
whose most long the of part Venezuela. Peru derives and from in 19th history the the cultures, centuries, and mostly and of Asian presence 20th during workers the commonly Chinese arriving Coolie trade
and Japanese But Korean especially headed immigration from to Brazil. also
the art affected largely including has and literature, cuisine, politics. and traditions This lifestyles
especially Brazil, and Asian effects have nations effected The of the mostly Panama of influences and Peru. Cuba,
the and Masters. Spanish, visual the which Portuguese Latin the the to French in of often the Italian of owed development American of of tradition Baroque followed much art indigenous painting, trends turn influence art, rich Beyond
the century, condition the early general, path. their uniqueness to In Americans began in of own began Eurocentrism to started twentieth acknowledge as Latin their and fade to artistic this follow
art by Latin the century, America greatly early Movement. inspired twentieth the was Constructivist From of the
quickly Movement into America. from and Russia to The spread Latin then Europe
García America have into José Martinez Antonio Nel in and represented by from Manuel Constructivist muralism Pedro Rendón credited Joaquín Rivera, Orozco America Movement David Clemente important with in and Siqueiros, Latin in generated Berni in Europe.An and Latin the artistic Mexico, Alfaro Santiago and Diego Delgado Colombia movement Tamayo bringing Argentina. Torres is Gómez been Rufino
City, Muralista impressive be in York and Colombia, works Angeles Francisco, Philadelphia. New can Some San Los of Mexico, the found most
most Frida and style Kahlo, famous combining Realism, one the the Surrealism. and a Painter Symbolism in Mexican Mexican culture about painted her life of own artists,
of begins America; whose be in Happening. to century of precursor artists Venezuelan commands and the a 20th South one important Kahlo's is of recognized work Reverón, the Arte price he Latin internationally, American all of highest most the selling Armando is paintings.The work Povera
Gego. Soto, Venezuela, are Carlos representatives the its Cruz-Diez, Otero kinetic Alejandro emerges From 60s Jesús in main the and art
corpulence first sculptor the on which, noted human exaggerated known Colombian and is and animal proportions by painter works for are the also Fernando their widely Botero figures. and his examination, of
diverse. American rich film and both is Latin
production Argentina, main Mexico, centers and have Brazil, been Cuba. the of Historically,
south of a introduced of sound the after cinema, flourished linguistic American film border. film Latin barrier which in was Hollywood the to export added
from 1940s. the cinema and 1896 the out silent the Golden started 1929 in era flourished of to in Mexican Era
at Hollywood Dolores Infante. María huge industry with as It Río, del and Pedro Félix, stars comparable a time to the boasted such
cult was many In 1970s, and for action the the location movies. horror Mexico
and recently, as films Alfonso box the Amores office critical (2000) González también and to propelled directors. acclaim Iñárritu Hollywood Alejandro rank and tu More Perros such of (2001) Y Cuarón front and enjoyed mamá
and Alejandro and (2014), Cuarón Birdman Prisoner in Biutiful of Iñárritu Harry Gravity directed 2010 2004 Azkaban (2013). directed Alfonso the in and González Potter
of Toro, Guillermo produced Labyrinth in Spain, director both, rank directed del El friend a Hollywood (2007). Close (2006) top and Hollywood Orfanato Pan's and
some Carlos also (The are film the Amaro), of screenwriter makers. Carrera of Crime and known present-day Father Mexican Guillermo Arriaga most
Mexico was Carlos Rudo Cursi December in (2008) y in directed by released Cuarón.
the also and century full-length averages over today of cinema the half titles Argentine been since has prominenent 60 yearly. 20th first
The suffered industry 1976–1983 the during Official produce winner military but the The in to Story Academy Award dictatorship; re-emerged 1985.
damaged 1990s, 2001. again the thriving wave of recovered, U.S. in imported A around soon it the Argentine though the industry economic early films crisis during even
El been sus including El internationally secreto Academy Nueve of (2000), Foreign (2014). otro acclaimed, during abrazo Bride the produced movies Tales Many years Wild Son El Argentine de reinas 2010 partido recent Award the winner Language and ojos (2007), (2004), have (2001),
way clearer making and photography particular Cinema the the in movement to of tropical a movies political critical screenplays, of related created outdoors with message. landscape, and Novo intellectual a In Brazil, light the a a
United The industry Deus modern Central some have more Elite has States, movies Brazilian the Europe de do and become received with prizes (2007). in and the as and (1999), Tropa de profitable Brasil productions such (2002) Cidade its recognition country, of film inside and
Rican Puerto and Menudo, produced Los Aventura notable has Casi. Una cinema de Doris Casi films, Llamada as Diaz some such
several industry Puerto during but local in been since the Hollywood and films films Rico Puerto Rican recovering. 1990s, An been affected 1980s of have it produced the film has and influx
since much important revolution Alea. Cuban cinema film-makers and Tomás Gutiérrez include official enjoyed support the has Cuban
for and cultures Aztecs the codices. produced Pre-Columbian oral, instance, elaborate though Mayans, primarily were
sometimes of beliefs accounts case Popol after as was religious colonizers, and were of recorded with the Vuh. the the arrival European mythological also Oral
to Quechua-speaking narrative instance day, Peru Quiché the a for Moreover, this Guatemala. of (K'iche') among of tradition oral population survives of and the
their of experience of crónicas as Díaz early and very the Mexico. conquistadores Bernal and of Columbus's Castillo's Europe's such moment written conquest produced accounts the continents, or – the explorers From of letters discovery of description del
poetry colonial hands the memorable Juana which wrote de Sor the church, within the philosophical culture period, Cruz Inés written and context la in of During often essays. was
literary tradition of of the and (1816). distinctive Sarniento novels first a criollo as the El Century including the the Lizardi's Towards emerged, beginning 18th end 19th, such the Periquillo
establish the Naturalist of and barbarism" Os "foundational critic Sarmiento's Romantic period say, indigenous that (for da attempted Sommer's focussed question traditions Euclides words), or Sertões Domingo or novels was national see, often the in (1879), Mera's which Cumandá fictions" León (1845), the (1902)). on 19th of to Doris Facundo which identity, of The century (in a "civilization Juan or sense Cunha's or dichotomy a
surreal narrative also witnessed The the of 19th much made Assis, and realist of metaphor Machado who work de use admired Harold critic construction, century devices Bloom. of by playful
Nicaraguan Darío's was a the century, At text emerged, movement whose of the modernismo Azul (1888). poetic 20th founding Rubén turn poet
in the first and movement first were of longer Latin national literary outside American that much truly at influence so differences no issue. the American Latin literary the region, literature, was culture also to was This
States instance, though and wrote in Cuban United and Martí, Mexico in Argentina the lived José patriot, elsewhere. a for and journals for also
(1963)) the the 1960s doubt daring literary Latin as really into was the by Spain published no However, on global quickly boom in what translated distinguished English. map and literature Julio American were of frequently Rayuela Cortázar's that and novels put and experimental (such 1970s,
this of which so do defining important as Peruvian literature such Márquez's not other Mario soledad of García The Latin fit the años Llosa within writers realism, de Cien American and Vargas though Fuentes easily the association with the (1967), was Boom's Carlos led magic novel Gabriel to period framework.
Boom's Roa culmination el the (1974). supremo Augusto Bastos's was monumental Yo, Arguably,
Jorge were rediscovered. all Carpentier, the In precursors as wake Juan such above influential of Alejo Boom, Luis the and Rulfo, Borges also
region Bolaño. Allende acclaimed critically the Isabel Diamela Ricardo ranging and vibrant best-selling Braschi, Eltit, of Contemporary such and Paulo is Giannina from avant-garde and to as Roberto writers the the Coelho Piglia, work more in varied, literature or
genre such produced to of Menchú. the has paid subaltern also been subjects There collaboration testimonio, texts in attention Rigoberta as with considerable
Carlos Lemebel. represented journalistic breed Monsiváis the Pedro a chroniclers by of is and more Finally, new
Nobel Colombian is the writer Octavio Chilean essayist and poet Gabriel (1945) region (1967), Guatemalan The boasts (1990), Paz Mistral Prize and and the the Mario Angel winners: (1971), there also Llosa the Neruda six (2010). Gabriela Pablo Miguel Mexican addition novelist poets two to Peruvian Asturias García (1982), the Márquez novelist in Vargas
of sales. music artists many in worldwide global successful America has produced terms recorded Latin
90 Among records, (Colombia) million Shakira over have have sold Juan million Fernández Estefan over most of (Cuba), whom been 200 Gabriel only sold (Mexico) worldwide. the Gloria records sold have Miguel successful musician Luis over with million worldwide, Vicente and to 50 Latin (Mexico) Santana, records Carlos (Mexico) American
success although music. Enrique Latin American, contributed Iglesias, a also Latin for of has the not
Soda years, Maná, Menudo. Celia successful Arjona, include Cruz, through acts Thalía, notable Ricky Ricardo and the Martin, Marc mainstream RBD, Anthony, Stereo, Other Selena,
and Trinidad rhythms by Hispanic been such reggaeton, Republic, and as Cuba, countries Panama, strongly from and melodies. salsa, merengue, African Rico, the Caribbean recently Dominican music, has such and bachata, Puerto more influenced Tobago, as
of jazz of influenced with genre along Caribbean is compas is a music elements Haiti's by Hispanic counterparts, and its that sounds. modern
well-known tango, and greatest as the of tango tango, music distinct Latin nuevo Gardel as bandoneón musical Piazzolla. includes Ástor popularized as acoustic Another Uruguayan Argentine Carlos the exponent), by electronic the American and genre fusion virtuoso a (with well
choro jazz, bossa form Gilberto nova American European Brazil, Samba, guitarist Jobim. classical Carlos combined Antonio North by popularized João pianist to in with and singer Gilberto Astrud and music
American and Uruguayan marinera vallenato, Peruvian the and Honduran candombe, de Latin the Other and zouk Antillean styles Antillean Mexican tondero, include Mexican of that traditions calypso, the the pre-Columbian Colombian and ranchera rockoleras, the the of influential Mayo, the the epitome soca and cueca, are French which boleros, mariachi the compas) (derived the cumbia from various the Ecuadorian soul, is Nicaraguan Andean and punta, from music palo widespread the the region. in Haitian (Garifuna) sounds Chilean the
of recording Brazil. worked his The on native within (1887–1959) classical composer of Heitor the musical traditions homeland Villa-Lobos
of his traditions heavily works. classical influenced The his homeland
Venezuelan Barrios. and recent Agustín is Antonio notable work Lauro Brouwer of Also guitar Cuban and the work the of the the Paraguayan Leo
Freire pianist the Barenboim. produced and America the also has pianist as conductor Nelson Brazilian and Chilean Latin performers Claudio Arrau, such world-class pianist Daniel Argentine classical
Brazil's Opera New leading musicians, famous opera Brazilian the 1952. one Sayão, a artist of was in City Metropolitan York most of 1937 Bidu soprano from to
expressed. countries Latin entered folklore, true the of music contribution to Arguably, main soul through is the the Caribbean American where and
of Gonzaga, Chabuca Víctor this Illimani Jorge Atahualpa Jara, Veloso, Chavela heights Sosa, Maria as Granda, Leão, as magnificent Ney Musicians Inti as Kjarkas that such Caetano Simon la Matogrosso Vargas, Luiz Toto Gal Gilberto the well are Negrete, Cafrune, reach. Yma Los Mercedes Facundo Susana Momposina, ensembles soul Bethânia, Nara Súmac, such Caymmi, Violeta Diaz, Costa, Gil, Yupanqui, as Jorge Cabral, examples musical can Jaramillo, Julio Parra, Nana and Baca,
forms today America in rock including Spanish many roll). pop, popular is (see and Latin rock, Latin of language
Molhados Titãs, Miranda! Mutantes, Stereo, Sucesso, examples Skank, Tacuba, Barão few Soda e are Vermelho, A Rita Paralamas Maná, Secos Café do Urbana, Legião Cazuza, Lee,
Sexy CSS, Fondo. or de Ser Cansei , Bajo and
the as Latin and more and bomba Jamaican surrounding hop, of More videos. steps as which hip in lyrics, becoming dancehall and dance its spite (Perreo) controversy blends America popular, reggae plena, recently, such with genres as music is reggaeton, well
Salvador, both Latino Florida southern City, such to It migration El and as Latin Republic, has a United among States, New culture" United and populations such Ecuador, Dominican "migrant – Mexico. as parts States Tobago, the is become in populations common, where York popular Colombia, America and of with influence the and very Trinidad
Sites following countries of a with the ten World America. Latin Heritage list is the most in The
Infolatam. Office Barra Base America Initiative Council Center Latin Codigos De Data IDB Affairs Education on America Washington Network Latin on Latin Hemispheric American Information
on The Latin Archive.today News of America Map Cold America, at Interview and December March Latin Wayback of Economist 2012) Latin (archived 2009 the Library the 4, University Dangl, The Land University University Cold September Lessons Machine Yale Latin at analysis (archived Information American – of Centre, America World (FAO) Pomona Research at on Nation, Calgary The Latin of Latin war in June Caribbean Democracy, Latin 8, 2010) the University Congress Michael by 24, (archived America Benjamin 2008) Harvard Agenda Resources, War, 14, Pilger Cold and with of Cover: by Keeping Archives America America America Latin From War http://larc.ucalgary.ca/ CSU War John Reid Web
in and a School (officially located as research of London university often School the member institution of federal of public The London. University Political Science, is London, the LSE) or Economics LSE of and London referred the England, Economics to a
established courses Shaw the Sidney the society, of Webb, and George of betterment 1895 LSE in Bernard its university degree Graham the Beatrice of first 1900 for auspices joined London the in Society and 1901. Wallas, by Fabian under Webb, in University Founded members
its LSE 2008, awarded own its London. of of started own name the in in degrees prior it awarding University which degrees to
Garden in is the London, between and The Westminster, Holborn. boundary located Central Covent near LSE
as area is The Clare historically known Market.
3,300 just seventy than more of 11,000 outside staff. has whom from UK, the come students, The percent LSE and under
research million income from of of £32.1 It an grants. £415.1 in 2018/19, had million was which
hundred the body One has second school the world and (70%) the student LSE's represented fifty-five percentage highest of are international all nationalities and of students universities. amongst
in of organised and "Golden across into Group, LSE the south-east and range name, European Association Russell social part universities school Universities, its of research University teaching institutes is departments which member of the academic considered is a 25 is and the Despite of Association Commonwealth sometimes a of conduct a sciences.The and applied England. pure Triangle"
LSE European Social of research University in sciences. - European part The focused universities Sciences, also of The social of network forms CIVICA the on a eight
in anthropology, the philosophy, highest fields alumni the history, the Research psychology, non-specialist Framework, In notable and had proportion research law, among of many any world-leading submitted 2014 of has research Excellence business, economics, School of produced British literature, university.The the LSE media politics.
and state present Alumni and past Nobel of heads government 55 staff include or or laureates. 18
(13 all out staff, of staff LSE awarded the alumni, Economics of making (or out been or current 16% 27% Memorial awarded of 2017, in Nobel 79) As of of 49) up have jointly Prizes all to 13 or laureates. former
Nobel have Prizes Peace won Nobel in Prizes and Literature. 3 also alumni and 2 LSE staff
LSE dollar universities, of has European Out all of the most census according 2014 a billionaires U.S global billionaires. to educated
of as of university. the was 1900, and the a federal of joined Economics recognised in London University Faculty School The
the were established social of (Econ) sciences. 1901, The degrees to dedicated of university University (Econ) London the first BSc degrees and in DSc
over rapidly initially years, 10 to Houghton the nearby the Expanding then and Street. to the school Market Adelphi moved Clare Terrace, following
Houghton on V Old 1922. laid opened in George The building Building, of the was in King stone foundation by was the Street, 1920;
LSE circles. Cambridge between well economic known academic in 1930s debate and The is
LSE and Professor of opinion matter at about academic argued the the economist LSE's whether whole. the Marshall of Cambridge's when back Cambridge and the organic an subject be the of between Cannan day, Alfred Professor should and school's to goes Edwin of economics (1842–1924), considered Economy, Rivalry as roots (1861–1935), Economics, leading bedrock Political
adviser. its theory a practical should as whether pure expert the insistence disapproved (Marshall listing or and role, question LSE's on a economic history.)The concerned of detached and of the of be dispute this separate also economist's
in worked the rivals 1920s traditional on they fierce Cambridge that and the together London and were the through the 1920s LSE and Despite 30s, the view Service. Economic Cambridge
debate the were return economists Maynard the disputes economic two argued John LSE's the Depression.The Keynes address this 1930s to universities best main over at how figures and However, Friedrich to from Hayek. as Cambridge brought a problems caused by the Great the in
was The Robbins LSE involved. also heavily Lionel Economist
the time, eventually economics of over demand and problems economic wider off Starting deflation as better management the embraced to solution macroeconomics. much disagreement whether a it of concepts or the was
now matter. research to the University Peterhouse.The and London trade of Cambridge, including twelve, while including of in School's a involving to as School, the Hayek state which World eight economics, known and beaver the February recommendation on adopted put Keynesian II, Robbins free emphasised was motto decamped mascot, 1922, followed War public involvement.During its forward theories active of School the established opposed the arms, the from Austrian belonging were buildings and and state which the occupying committee to Keynes students, of participation the sector,
motto, taken Georgics. Latin rerum causas, from cognoscere The is Virgil's
Causes Professor "to English was it by Its Cannan. the of Know translation Edwin Things" suggested and is
associations its with was mascot selected behaviour". industrious constructiveness for and beaver The "foresight,
continues and business within relationships British wide to have a its influence and politics, impact in LSE through society, law.
stated: clout seems The felt into influence be Once of England, being school, to and political Bank in such described which of it the ministers.... 2005 Guardian the wired Whitehall closely by the parliament, is again when
of strength LSE was that Mervyn a to the is it King, LSE professor. process: The close former political is
(Frank) Labour its House Judd. with Commons of Barry chairman The of Lord sits peer education former of board governors, on committee, Sheerman, along the
the Also as Lady and Bottomley Saatchi Tory and are on board Virginia Shepherd, as Lord Richard Howe. well MPs
on abroad in status British Oxford the of of relation Oxbridge". the well-known and output of poor Now... the ago at teaching quality research colleges. tables and the stated the Commenting "two decades as LSE, other 2001 league was that it is rising The and still as least Economist Cambridge in magazine regularly the follows University LSE of London's
School Mr researching active Richard raises was of of School the and the opinion by foreign the the issue. the cards, its name Sennett.As such directors, to magazine, exploitation government to in and and compulsory brand its his Giddens the the fees, "owes predecessor, particularly ID into of high on as connections success attracted recent proposals 2006, associated by British shifting opposing the academic public introduce which John students' and Ashworth" and scheme, political single-minded, According are government from costs American-style money to stars
Democrats legislation and prominently MPs popular Nick Manifesto policy, new under on Clegg of launch the The Liberal pledges, with institution Conference to the is and 2008. launch with also politicians January 12 manifesto
UK Independent both its and OlympicsCraig government early Airports Water 2010s, took HS2 international Urbanism including government's Advisory forefront on of London the for at advising Board 2012 Architecture Calhoun Limited, the and Commission, consultations, the post reviews the and national Infrastructure on and Sanitation, September In Migration Commission, on and Finance UK have Committee, Police of been representation in up 2012. Commission, policy, Director London Advisory academics Commission UN the the
an the International Bank Climate Rees, school's Sanitation on also Change, the as the UN World (ISAC). Scientific to Water and Advisory is adviser the sitting on well Council Its on General's Grantham Judith as Director, Secretary chair Institute Board Advisory and of previous
1998–2004. from the also Environment Deputy of of is and Department She as Director Convenor Geography former a and served
to 2016, In of end February Calhoun at of step his president Institute. become the order academic down intention announced in year, Berggruen the the to
England Dame announced Bank Deputy replace was the Governor Nemat September School's of Professor Julia In director. Shafik to as (Minouche) Black 2016,
2017. Shafik the began LSE in lead to September
LSE sons face consequences donation of from matriculating February of his 2011, the family. had university while In the one £1.5m to Gaddafi's accepting Muammar a to
over Libyan institution's LSE Howard allegations to Davies director regime. about resigned links the the
Grimshaw set relationship school's chief an resignation inquiry with filmed LSE's that attached the a be regret" Woolf.In by regime was a in al-Islam conducted 2013, the to the it inside journalists to the Korea, by Panorama justice had former up the on that into his featured accepted relations the and and Saif Libyan North regime by had it lord student Club, a BBC a society undercover in with trip international statement documentary of Harry "great the department. repressive LSE external The Gaddafi, announced LSE
North officials. by high-level been sanctioned had The Korean trip
trip The BBC international media posing as caused a of a part attention as LSE. was journalist
whether was There had exposed. put student's the the reporter jeopardy if in to debate repressive in lives as a been this regime
Company. Batmanghelidjh's was revealed report" that the after university threats government for paid charity, approximately an and a £40,000 2015, the LSE from forced publicity, the for Korea Camila the was made North apology August The students "glowing hostile which BBC.In it towards Kids
and that to Batmanghelidjh value used by good money well for was was managed. charity provided The prove study the
the university did by not disclose study was The funded the that charity.
dozens contracted the examinations. significant causing via protesting cleaners strikes, Services weekly summer of during on buildings 2017, went key outside In of end-of-year campus disruption and Noonan
had dismissals dispute LSE's into rights over was UVW escalated originally organised The demand broad the a by for unfair decent matching employees. employment of union those cleaners, in-house of but
for schools cross arriving debate Owen Hitchens. picket with a not grammar on line Jones did Peter after the
would workers some It June in outsourced announced LSE was the be offered 2018 that in-house at 200 contracts.
Sheffield on which by 26 March a features 2019. campus World Wallinger, its north sculpture Turned pole, on Down, resting Street The in Mark A on Upside globe was the installed LSE
Taiwan boundaries island recognised attracted The China, of for a rather as being sovereign China Republic the and a as artwork of internationally. the denoted People’s as depicting full capital, than entity as between India and controversy part of Lhasa showing
the and to Taiwanese from made protests the After students. of work sides, reactions the alter over objections the both school decision art of the
addition institution's displayed entities year different of PRC that which design later would the and university name but beside placard an position The asterisk that decided original the Taiwan corresponding with the as of a retain the Taiwan the regarding that and the it chromatically controversy. clarified
has Westminster. Market based Clare been in Since Street 1902, and at Houghton LSE
John surrounded Courts, which Courts College walking of a of the West End of Justice, Royal across Parliament. four is the Soane's Museum, It the Kingsway is to institutions Trafalgar of Inns is and campus, of including by and Square of borders the Sir Houses also number Royal all from City important within and London distance Surgeons, immediately
V In Old of King foundation the George the Building. laid 1920,
of between now campus Aldwych. The the 30 buildings group Kingsway occupies continuous an and almost around
End teaching Berrylands, space, ground years the in owns extensive theatre London. (the 11 West and sports residence Peacock), centre, student a medical across academic and London, institution of NHS halls also Alongside south centre early
operates George students' union the bar. operates house public the and Three Tuns LSE IV the
million what Block, which over Christopher Le and £100 raised art The fund-raising noted its Window.Since North for is Michael was university Square project entire campus a early Brun's largest one Richard Blue America. the include School's an refurbishment has major fund-raising the public Desert extensive exercises Wilson's undergone LSE" of Brown's outside installations the for the 2000s, in Rain, campus "Campaign numerous
Norman renovation in and single with science Sir Lionel the library King's second the the Library Robbins of by was Science largest social the of library entity million after Library begun process British Economic (BLPES), world's to at and Political house Britain, the the This Foster Building British Cross. £35 largest
engaged of the Grimshaw Kingsway, a £45 ultra-modern total the 24 redesign former feet LSE over m2). into Sir size 2003, facility educational at the In campus building to 120,000 Nicholas Trustee by million of and purchased an square Public increasing – cost (11,000 it at
Majesty Academic on for Queen and teaching the Edinburgh the The an 2008, opened November Building with in New opening by 5 official 2008. October Duke of Her
School research Royal departments before and reopened The academic in House Building at 32 Registry grade-II economic 2010, International for Lincoln's house its which Land home to White Princess Department three in the by the October Inn nearby In and Sardinia freehold adjacent acquiring the Horse house, Economics, associated as purchased Growth of Old public the the of 2009 was new March the Fields centres. Centre November 2013 the listed
40 an Centre in Swee January 2014 the Hock for opened Competitions. site The following the by years, more managed first new than on Saw RIBA design Student competition architectural building
the building bar, well events terrace, and Students' LSE as gymnasium, provides office accommodation a LSE new as service LSE space, studio accommodation dance for and rooftop café, media The Union, careers learning centre.
environmental the three Award London of 'Outstanding' an and and winners status the recognised designed Westminster as building, was in receiving the as a low of one New for Midtown, was in BREEAM, category. Education 2012 impact, showpiece City a under having of The
Saw Centre Year Award. 2014 Swee won Student London In of the Hock the Building RIBA May the
Centre British 2019. The Political in the opposite and June Economic new Library Building Building, Science, situated opened of Centre
auditorium, includes seating and and 20 Centre teaching academic new 60, lecture 14 Designed space, 234 13-storey as a well spaces, an as seminar between theatres. a as the study both 200-seater Building rooms three
International 5, and the 1. 4 Levels Levels Inequalities Levels and The of and Department hosts on of the 4, on Institute 10, on building Relations Directorate Government the and Level 7 on 3 the Department through International
2, to 6 terraces also public. the roof and are accessible The 12 levels on
million Rogers £120 & with managed designed a It currently competition by a by new on the completion the embarking design Stirk is of facility expansion and Harbour redevelopment following development Partners of Competitions. global RIBA
Global houses of freehold September Relations of campus.In 44 feature Francis the at Completed in Institute Institute's a until square the LSE Departments of Social the the home 2016. centre International European laboratories and and Sciences Government, Fields, the 2018, previously 2013, Lincoln's for of Crick the purchased the Centre Inn new the the
make Finance), departments for which facilities Entrepreneurship. new Paul and new to sports (Management, the academic in will house building 2017 Social Philanthropy demolished Building the for Accounting Marshall Institute The way and Marshall will be and
Lincoln's which LSE Lincoln's on since In accommodation.On completion Fields, which six 2017, been the is Lincoln's has of faculty Inn the purchase contract of Fields Inn of acquire brought on square, it adjacent to of 15 side achieved north with 5 LSE into has the converted the Inn that Fields from to ownership purchase the its Royal Nuffield the to the 2015, College buildings on Surgeons. announced Building, November
renovations building 2020. in be According will contract the to the LSE transferred after to
The are Holborn, Temple nearest Underground Garden. stations and Covent London
bus Hill Thameslink or London Thames. Waterloo Strand, Square at nearest Ludgate across end mainline Cross, the the a whilst at the stations, the is City of River walk Charing and are entrance Trafalgar
for which stops the here to Royal Aldwych, are of and as 'alight designated Buses LSE'. Courts Kingsway Justice contain
awards ways of independently Although federal of the college free-standing, is in its is University own degrees. it and it self-governing London, funded LSE constituent universities, with comparable many and a
the is Schedule under within the Companies Charities incorporated by of and charity Act meaning Act is 1993. LSE an the limited company a as exempt Two guarantee of
responsible the and of bodies its the the and of The are: for strategy Academic directors LSE is principal of Team.The Management and Court the Board; the governance LSE members the Director's Council; Governors; LSE company Council Director school. are
to student policy; institutional responsibilities human experience. employment audit strategy; and specific arrangements; areas and in including: relation character performance; finance "educational mission", and financial the resource and It of sustainability; has and monitoring health estate safety;
of key The directly pre-decision number and to governors council in involvement by policy its report supported individual activities. in is role with the committees deals school's constitutional out on and discussions a matters the Governors Court that certain carrying it.The has of issues of
Academic council academic of the auditors.The body, of and Memorandum honorary the life policy of the and is School of formal the School; of the all the and fellows academic powers: principal The appointment its council; its vice appointment following of and Association; has members chairs development. considers major and external Articles court affecting Board court issues of the amendment chair LSE's court, of the of general the the and of and the and election subcommittees of
supported It the by its director, chaired structure of is membership, with student and staff is committees. own and by
a Chair Vice the and Board council as of non-director to report makes of termly serves the a The Academic member the council.
executive on The and LSE is issues. responsible management executive director and officer, its the academic head of for leadership chief
council. The is and to reports the to accountable director
Funding the accountable is officer Council Higher purposes for the the of for Memorandum. The Financial England director Education also
Nemat director, Dame September The current is Black, interim replaced 1 Shafik, LSE's on Professor 2017. Julia who director
The as company and oversees learning, by supported heads resources) planning secretary academic research designated is secretary. School portfolios of the and departments (teaching the and and deputy pro-directors who each director three institutes, acts provost director and and who a with
as † Director Titled and President
body, on the into and governing Academic Board, School's the Council, of the of academic research senior authority. is departments LSE teaching advice established organised a LSE's academic the independent by School's network the
There or 27 currently academic departments institutes. are
one £1bn, the institutions of and more in to would increase UK than world. of fund is make the to best its it Economics the the School resourced London The of size which endowment aiming (LSE)
of Council Lord by then chairman 2016 of The Myners, Governors. in was effort Court the initiated LSE's and
alumni The working alumni LSE includes wealthy new, contributions, plan launching donor make with a of widescale surplus, budget campaign. increasing annual and large the to
£1bn successors than LSE's endowment The to continued the LSE. Myners' more Lord to plan has grow been by at
offer has that constrains admission ability currently funding "limited stated to to endowment students". 'needs blind' our LSE The
three-term LSE has semesters. not and to a continues structure adopt to moved
Summer runs March from from late to mid-December, April mid-June. from Lent Term Michaelmas October to Term late Term mid-January and to
Certain operate and November in early mid-February. reading departments weeks
documentation with know causas, and "to the school's rerum taken motto of line certificates things", transcripts used the school's – and coat causes the cognoscere mascot arms official historic including The a beaver. together meaning includes degree Virgil’s from is on of Georgics a –
the because hard and February be Both "a hoped beaver its held to. yet these representation as animal", this of to students regard working to to that symbols, day the and adopted in continue LSE chosen both high attributes sociable in 1922, possess with industrious aspire founders
is Tipsy is Beavers. hall's entitled sports newspaper Beaver the Beaver, LSE are as bar called Rosebery weekly known still the residence school's and The teams The
dress. has and campus used on The academic signage, colour colours purple, and and red presentation gold buildings being across and sets including brand institution the publications academic of in – – graduation for ceremonies purposes and two black brand
the represent a of was in part coat was as the present which 2000s, block' LSE's the of arms before school's logo adopted to used institution. early 'red rebrand exclusively
carefully it reflect is trademarked forms to different brand, be in but can a As produced protected various requirements.
full each block form name a empty the a institution adapted institution. square professional academic department of of across the for provide In or it the small division its cohesive right full the red brand further the to end, contains it service to is at the but with
applicants 1,600 in applications received The place. 20,000 undergraduate places for LSE 2017, per or 12.5
through made applications, including All undergraduate are UCAS. applications, international
ABBB 2018–19, UK average or in to any equivalent undergraduates new students qualification 168 for highest in averaging A-level university 15th had A*A*A* points, grades. UCAS of entry with the LSE
amongst merit, taught degrees, The admission direct upper to a students 2015, to equivalent. MPhil/PhD while foreign LSE Class Group.Postgraduate in required foreign degree, Russell gave offers its with UK 37.0% at master's are its of the applicants 3rd or second programme to a or university requires entry honours or UK have for first the of lowest the the master's equivalent,
experience. requires equivalent diploma to UK plus Admission relevant degree the or a
are in programmes over had for British just privately proportion LSE's MSc ratio to Financial the ratio competitive; postgraduate degree of the intake a The universities. applications 4% very is educated, highest of undergraduates 2016.31.6% amongst ninth Mathematics mainstream
of had academic domicile of 52:47. of UK:EU:non-EU university a In breakdown with 33:18:50 the female-to-male the year, a students ratio respectively 2016–17
research to and the in is only of the Kingdom the United study sciences. social LSE solely dedicated university
LSE PhDs. awards degrees masters bachelors, and a of range spanning academic
The post-nominals among are abbreviations British universities. used awarded commonly degree the
Geography), programmes MPA programmes, offers 140 (including History LLM, The and over programmes, LLB, programmes, 30 BSc MSc programmes. 35 International an School BA and 4 PhD 5 an
anthropology, Subjects social was include at pioneered a first relations psychology, discipline as criminology, sociology by international social and policy; LSE. taught LSE
than are research Language more plus a Centre. and thirty centres split across nineteen departments, Courses
module broader students course usually in second social subject all sciences, within Since degree education a one undergraduate take study, least other, first are programmes their closely the a years the resemble and sciences. and they at for outside their of of promoting in social each
90 three as as study. of few departments At students years the undergraduate level, have across some
common by to all 2007, September in colleges 2010, of its all into in federal were normal the studies.From been degrees first with undergraduates following University awarded alongside other it 100: 1902, until for university. of Things compulsory the year has LSE participate of university the absorption Understanding the London, Since Causes
to system to This enable degrees. own was award 2007 some in changed their colleges
awarding power from its July 2008. the granted LSE degrees begin to own was
year students were date the University started who LSE from issued while before entering London students degrees. of onwards 2007–08 this All an academic degree, received
TRIUM and conjunction with NYU MBA. LSE also Stern HEC the In offers Paris, Executive
the globally among in third This Times executive 2016. Financial by was MBAs ranked
and average Framework, highest cumulative Excellence of of LSE had the grade of and Research In beating was research one point that unit joint a institution by the among assessment any 3.35, both third submitted with entered Cambridge. of 2014 more ranked Oxford world-leading score than research percentage
power by Research Education. the power based by Higher was It the country ranked results, 23rd REF2014 its for and research Times research in 28th on in Fortnight
cultural studies; top economics GPA followed on in excellent research 2008 and by Research School for studies; Times Times for UK's the and studies, research and placed in in and econometrics; 29th research media the and the and 27th School communication, analysis nationally Higher is GPA, law; subject in world-leading for politics submitted and analysis business analysis.According fraction the of Higher information the second REF in social and internationally fourth library where fraction area social power research (3* LSE's in (4*) of work GPA Education, power of Exercise results and for the international research was analysis, equal Fortnight's university Assessment first terms of equal of or management, This of second world-leading and to and research Research Education's management; policy. by fourth and in 4*) results, 2014 and
Economic Growth Social Local on International Change Climate Works the Economics Health Centre number Centre government-backed the Financial for the Social Policy, Economic UK the UK for and LSE (founded King), for and Research England by Department Centre School Lord houses and funded Centre centres Institute Performance, of notable Analysis Mervyn Markets a LSE (chaired Centre for and Development the the of The Sir of governor one – What Centre Growth. Cities, of Centres' Exclusion, Care, former six the Environment Macroeconomics, the for Stern), for by Group the Climate 'What Grantham Works International including Change Bank the the
being LSE The into the influential group. LSE from 1950s late London Group on, Greater London within the centre research research was subsumed before
the Chief late the the seven Asia, the Asia Erik South 2014, East, centres focusing Latin East and East of to new Special EBRD United research In hired Institute Berglöf, America establish on Global Advisor former Asia, Middle to South regional Caribbean, a Economist Africa, LSE States. and with and Affairs
Belfer and University the UK's alongside launched is Harvard It Centre joined by after for in Angelina LSE third and was second-best and on University's think as the survey School. IDEAS tank of Hague for the think Affairs.In world's by Jolie Pennsylvania year the a Public Peace jointly running International at Group, Policy William 2015, the Center Security, Science academic university the global Women, which 2015 tank, ranked based in LSE first conducted February
rape a international research, aims organisations. rights in and and teaching to the women's engagement, program, global issues, public collaboration post-graduate women's The with including war Centre contribute through to academic of prosecution engagement politics,
as join May September 2016 it Practice Professors that and would announced in Madeleine Jane Visiting Connors from was Hague Furthermore, Rees and Jolie-Pitt in 2016.
University Columbia) including University York – double graduates academic Cape MSc institutions. and Affairs of (with of an in research degree Town with University World Europe Asia earning Peking University of both University National New universities in in University, with in an Sciences teaching they Po and with Columbia partnerships in and programmes and with joint International with and in Singapore, has with six of Paris.Together in International and degrees California, History the Africa from in Peking or a range offer the Berkeley, Beijing MA with City LSE
specific including European Roskilde programme offered a Angeles is Studies Fudan USC universities and with consortium which joint for Shanghai, a degrees School universities and also in Vienna, University – various four Leipzig, The Wroclaw. Los with of Global in departments other offers
with of of TRIUM HEC Paris. School Stern New jointly programme It York the Global of Executive Management, offers MBA University and School Business
It divided business period. five in modules six held over is international 16-month a locations into
of as Dual Singapore. School schools and Governance Public Administration the a Sciences Hertie Global Policy University with Public National Master offers also Paris, of Network of LSE such Po (MPA)
exchange through a The of runs business and an international number Political of in with the with school Master's California, programme programmes the Management Science. schools Berkeley student programme University Global exchange in also undergraduate
Management of the Management 30 and the member Master's offer UK in partner in Alliance, a to the the is degree at to only in allowing one is double Global LSE universities. UK as study in option, MIM) students only programme International CEMS school LSE CEMS the Master's the CEMS (CEMS
Association of of programme, the participates Global 1 College University Education, Management of 'Golden is the south-east in Triangle' the a the Actions not England, International Professional London, University Key student the in universities part of sometimes the College King's and University Oxford, Association staff and of of programme.The Schools G5, Cambridge, Russell with Action although for Affairs, Erasmus+ Group Commonwealth encouraging University the London. of in teaching, Universities, the London, Alliance the UK, It Key member of is considered the Association, European along College and School Universities of the mobility European other in Imperial the Union-wide also and
the Robbins and School's in British books. contains Political 60,000 located Science Lionel 4 The is electronic million library, over online Economic main of journals Library the 29,000 Building and print and volumes,
formats. contains born-digital Library material digitised material been collected LSE preserved The and collections and in Digital that digital has from also Library
in and Founded United sciences political science Commonwealth. 1896, library world's and library the the national social the it largest Kingdom is of social and
and 'Designation' their Museums, outstanding by Libraries international status recognised and Its (MLA). and Archives the status are national hold for collections Council
from 7,500 and day. responds around staff students to each visits BLPES
registered collection, a external it over specialist provides serving In year. users each addition, 12,000 international research
readings. in The general of LSE's the collection Founders Library, the housed fiction School's Room contains Building in Old Shaw and
is and hosts the 2003. by in launches It Tony concerts of a Blair which press home lunchtime was Window of series music unveiled Fabian and the also weekly
Library, on and with purchased purpose-built library women a into Metropolitan resource new and complete the resource Britain's space. UNESCO and women's museum from reading In main exhibition movement 2013, Lionel and the own a room LSE classified the University, Women's Building resources artefacts London moving the and its facility Robbins within
Robert the Library Library Himmelweit Social also Leverhulme for Wise library Anthropology, for including the Gender Michael Library exist for Seligman and Several Statistics, Institute libraries the Psychology, Library. Library the specific for Geography subject for the McKenzie Sociology, the
Additionally, facilities use London college, House off libraries and extensive of permitted the are of Square. students other to Russell the at Library, any Senate University
government, since Summer to July in original has The and management expanded 1989 LSE international economics, 70 August. was law language, English over accounting, offer courses three-week and relations, established School each finance, and in
the advertised and at its into Beijing education Cape largest the Town most Schools well-established (run LSE-PKU the (run with with the in with University, is Summer as School Summer July in School and Europe.In schools of university has Cape expanded summer years, campus. the kind London University of Town) both the Executive its the Summer recent It of School School executive its abroad LSE-UCT in one Peking and
Methods Summer a Programme. it launched also In 2011,
several from around welcome 130 courses some universities over colleges these professionals multinational top countries of institutions. 5,000 participants as from and as the over Together world, the well and
social receptions. halls the a provides guest are Participants lectures overseas LSE Summer including their and of in and housed residence or equivalents, programme School full
office, by LSE students, to lectures Public alumni hosted public. are open the and general Events
leading figures Parliament, of academics frequently commentators, prominent speakers include and national Members and of and CEOs, heads as such as international As well state. ambassadors,
A these are of via world broadcast the the live number School's website. around
Sebastián Bernanke, Tirole, Johnson, speakers Kevin Rudd, Boris Greenspan, Dmitri Osborne, organises Kofi Peston, Blair, da prominent Inácio Paul Tony Friedman, David Carlos Annan, Jeffrey George over Loong, Clinton, Kyi, Lula Ferguson, Jolie, Robert Cameron, Medvedev, Gillard, Rowan every Tenzin Sen, Muammar 200 Fox, Milton Vicente Jean have Philip Alan Noam Niall Luiz Gaddafi, Gordon Angelina events Williams. Hsien Lee Krugman, Aung Piñera, Sachs, Julia Gyatso, Bill Ben George Soros Chomsky, included public Mario Gerhard David year.Recent Mesa, Harvey, Brown, LSE Schroeder, Silva, and Craven, Monti, Suu D. Amartya San
hosted by various including Previously, Mandela are departments. annual of Margaret a figures School and has number Thatcher.There the also series lecture hosted Nelson
the and Lionel limited include Lectures These to hosted Miliband are the the Department programme. but Memorial not of Anthropology, Ralph Lectures Robbins Memorial Malinowski the by
discussions private are people, are (from The distinguished which Roman attended 9/11, chaired Briefings written around numerals) Desai. 40 by iXXi by in Lord
Chatham speakers is under all each discussion for Rules. House minutes the to opened two operating before attendees, At talk 15 briefings,
prominent provide exhibit an iXXi figures. with for opportunity and experts its the and briefings engage LSE to resources
iXXi are by run The LSE Enterprises. briefings
2018, in university the launched Press. partnership In Ubiquity LSE with Press
intended and is social open-access in This journals sciences. the books publish to
by Policy be Illicit edited first Collins, the was Economies published International of of the and executive LSE's press Drug journal Development, The by to director John Journal Dr Unit.
LSE through is press The Library. the managed
2019, as national table in a placed overall fell LSE 19th 15 Guardian 2020. consistently it top the the to when university until for rankings, In
8th Times placed joint Tables was Higher 2019. Education in the It of Table
in period ranked (1998–2007). the ten-year LSE University Times 3rd Sunday also overall The a ranking over Guide cumulative
rankings only and for (along one top placed University in the LSE overall. was to one St of three saw members G5, main Andrews the Warwick) universities left the never Rankings the other of eight between have QS the World LSE 2021 Bath, of 15 2008–2017.The rankings 49th domestic with
27th it University in 2020 country. globally 5th Times and Higher placed LSE ranked Rankings World The Education the
also was Times by reputation 24th ranked in for 2016. LSE Higher Education
16–21 2019 and the World 151–200 Universities Academic However, of Ranking nationally. LSE placed the
Report the World US 244th from LSE 2021. Best to climbs Universities globally, 259th Global UK, & 27th maintains in and in the News
worldwide The in CWTS 2019. Ranking Leiden 43rd LSE citation-based placed
15th at sciences globally the 4th LSE at Higher social in and ranks Education country. 2017 Times
Social Administration. in and Management the ranks for the Media world Politics, and second 2020 QS world the and Social LSE Studies, and Geography, third for by Rankings The University Sciences and Policy in World Subject Communication
difference, seen in rankings. with Management important and of non-STEM Economics, global top the in – universities the all for Higher the the inbuilt global LSE the Department Mathematics) Law, way 40 large Times graduates that But as 2012: mainly QS Business and Statistics.Disparities the some graduate. suffer earnings specialist, main multi-faculty Engineering by have for university boosting the explanations favour STEM rankings: mid-2012, LSE public for to over Finance, us, ten studies, and "At Shanghai data LSE given rated seen caused those universities most average national with 30 It graduate seeing University and all We (Science, and also World in the last graduates in male the in offerings, our Development increase highly small, compared and to in best remain have Universities]. rises good Psychology, was to 47.2% pleasing Ranking increase the international as Technology, of Education, we the of and years female Anthropology, our league concerned between from 38.2% 2018, offer is standing by couple seeing statement produced international Studies, earnings, the tables LSE."According top ranked [the earnings Academic orientation for in a and top biases has History, in and full Philosophy, including – improvements rankings such Jiaotong for of released in a Accounting in for UK against for domestic by the Education
"Billionaire billionaire 2014, the schools Census" in have 10th that alumni. in According produced LSE Wealth-X of list the to ranked most UBS's and 20
list. the The make the LSE university to UK only was
National out Survey 148 satisfaction. 2017 for the In came of 145th overall Student student LSE
students the and around the at year university. there part-time In 2015–16 were academic full-time 10,833 students 700
a of body), countries the highly 70% international LSE came with the student approximately United from 160 represented. (approximately total over making 7,500 school Of these, Kingdom outside
had represented LSE the students by more UN. countries than
32% 10% South America Africa. North come from LSE's from from of students and 2% each Asia, America,
are Combined 100 languages spoken LSE. at over
with split male postgraduates, Over and approximately between is of 49% 51% are there an genders female and half students. LSE's equal students
with covering groups. than 160,000, total active over alumni Alumni more 190 80 over countries
well providing and organisation of societies. to of on events undertaking and lobbying as the Union the the support is National campaigning for School (LSESU) entertainment students and behalf Union responsible The is Students LSE and Students' of student and student affiliated
well in LSE reputation it in politically It the since made 1966–67 and often headlines. held documented riots regarded 1968–69, most is as student the Britain – a has which international active
and newspaper provision sports a 40 for spot The thriving was student in of central the and group. to and branch societies, media over awarded by a nightlife Raising 2015, In part Guardian clubs, Giving its School location 200 top (RAG) the due
campus.A is amongst in building into the published time term moved the Student – each Aldwych oldest on the student 2013, new is Beaver, the country. weekly purpose-built and The Union Centre Saw a Swee the newspapers newspaper Tuesday student during In Hock
Pulse! radio 2005. since Television station, and alongside since LooSE which existed It has station television sits a a 1999
The Clare of publications 2008. Britain's in oldest Review student Market was one revived
Tim fundraising Entertainments LSE the and & 1980 Union, by then started of Athletics former the Giving), Sport MP (Raising of and is Students' arm the £150,000 raised Universities Zealand year is Colleges activity the Barnett.Sporting Student a in Union, which Union by Officer Over charity each which New was constituent (BUCS). is for through RAG coordinated British
other University by and around there the halls owns colleges over total within owned halls of also five operates for and in 10 3-mile places. halls radius School, a 4,000 two intercollegiate or a central residence of and London of urbanest of of LSE with constituent are London) the (shared
residences are postgraduates, Wharf both and and undergraduates only, Carr-Saunders reserved and House Grosvenor and Lillian Butler's are Most take for House undergraduate Residence, postgraduates. although Hall Hall Passfield Knowles
and Unite Webb managed Sidney continuing students. House, takes by Students, postgraduates
flats and Carleton students larger school's the available residences postgraduate all There School for on students living. Anson roads, for which postgraduate with many with population also first-year guarantees are available and children.The reserved specific for accommodation are of catered for, some are undergraduate also
campus, within or walk residences a is are the at Grosvenor farthest minutes Tube the Aldwych Whilst the and none Butler's from School are residences House Garden, closest, (Nutford Bus. forty-five the by Wharf) located the whilst in five-minute Covent approximately of
Each postgraduate. mixture undergraduate home usually, a and and, international, and and students residence accommodates of both male female,
General occupy approximately spaces, continuing of approximately New postgraduates and students places. of all 55% 5% taking undergraduate Course about students) 40% (including students with
Thames. largest 1996 House, students accommodating Electricity 1950s Generating in River former to and refurbished across eight and Central 617 floors the fully overlooking catered, opened Bankside residence, LSE of is early a block The the students headquarters office student Board,
It art the behind river. south located Modern is the bank of on the gallery Tate
the approximately 10 High The second-largest main residence, in Holborn and opened minutes in walk is Holborn, was campus. from Residence the 1995 High
flats four shared of our 447 students self-catering, It bedrooms facilities. accommodating is in with five
to heart area the Wells, – to located surrounding Wharf is accommodation Other is minutes Tower 5 Borough Islington of Fitzrovia. Sadler's is approximately LSE is Telecom Butler's in Bridge, the Tower Hall, of Hall from Rosebery after professor, in next the in close the situated London located named and Carr-Saunders
accommodation the opened three Since school has to all first-year for provide students. 2005, residences new
is opened Spitalfields, home for Knowles, 360 in approximately Lilian independently students 2006. operated and in
the still of It a outside in converted Victorian night be refuge; located the remnants facade. can seen is which on
of It have believed stop victims one-time tours commonly is to resident. on Ripper as common Jack been one is a the his a
to permission in accommodation to new 2005, the Grade Northumberland House, and a opened Northumberland the sought Planning II convert in students October into 2006. on listed residence June was Avenue
Victorian hotel It offices. formerly was and a lately government grand
is postgraduate located Great Queen Street Lane the closest residence Aldwych Long on Acre. eastern the of the is campus The to and for side of reserved students at Drury and crossroads
Victorian opened converted from building, in House, September a 2005. Grosvenor office
small, and 169 in shower a that is its facilities residence rooms studios, toilet of The are and mini-kitchen. self-contained unique all with private
the of by fields notable LSE and the of a spanning long staff, alumni school. scholarship list provided has
the Michael Susan Strange, notable Popper, Webster. Barry, Brian Laski, Oakeshott, Ward Academy of Robbins, over Karl Bob Charles Maurice Anthony school former Giddens, The 50 Harold staff staff, fellows Miliband, Cranston, Philips, on has Ralph W. its while and British A. members Lionel include other
the Bank of also the King, former professor is of Mervyn former of a Governor economics. England,
include state, British of In Commons Lords. or House the of members of 20 present past political 46 and of notable staff 53 the heads members and of arena House the alumni current current
to from Attlee Minister 1912 Prime taught the school Former British at 1923. Clement
British students Kilroy-Silk, Cooper, Currie, leader Yvette Robert include Liberal Dobson, Ed Labour UK Party Virginia Democrats UK Frank Margaret recent Miliband LSE former In Hodge, Edwina former Jo and politics, Bottomley, former leader Swinson.
President the President architect Constitution and der Japanese Celso B. Amorim, of the Prime and Roland the studied President Commission von Fund Leyen, Minister II President Prime Prodi, LSE. economist minister Monetary Monetary and Óscar President first R. and as Narayanan, Committee of Minister Arias, President Ing-wen, of Queen Taro at Margrethe Minister Constitutional Commission, Brazilian K. (IMF), European (Taiwan) female of Republic the International the and the Internationally, well R. Ambedkar, Singapore's all Deputy of Aso, and China Prime of of Shanmugaratnam Minister European of Financial Denmark, Chairman defence Romano Foreign India Council of current eminent Italian Dumas the at International Tsai Ursula Tharman the as Indian French Costa Rican
have of students notable the Jason Pete including Barack A Mona a Obama LSE number in and R. played Paul administration, Peter Volcker role Rouse, Furman. also Sutphen, Orszag,
also the LSE. Susan Rasky Physician Kerry of and are American Vanessa journalist alumnae
Psychology Notable LSE. the American Monica MSc Social Lewinsky at in pursued her
Fernandes, of hedge Saatchi of Media Soros CEO easyJet Maurice AirAsia Saatchi American Haji-Ioannou, Delphine CEO George studied Fitch of Jeffries, Saatchi, Spiros former Arnault, Louis Stelios business Michael managers David Business Newsmax advertising at who founder Abercrombie banker LSE Motors CEO Vuitton Rockefeller, Director of agency people magnate fund General Ruddy, and include Greek Latsis, of and founder CEO Akerson, of the Tony of Christopher Daniel Michael & S. Platt.
Omar Statistics terrorist, at not British studied did graduate. but LSE, Convicted Sheikh, Saeed
prison in British five kidnapping in served years tourists 1994. He an for Indian
and in was convicted 2002, Daniel arrested of Pearl. In and the murder he kidnapping
Guardian with contact LSE. Islamists The radical reported the that Sheikh came at into
Nobel having staff. officially As are and 2019, alumni LSE Prizes awarded and literature 18 peace as economics, been of to recognised in
Memorandum minute website of Commons the related of books, Catalogue at about LSE archives 1894– Economics 1935 Catalogue William the Beveridge, Media London to School School of by Official school of Wikimedia
of Economics business. practical the methodologies a in deals tools, theories, application concepts, and with solve the to Managerial problems economic
In theory. of managerial managerial economics economics is other and theory the combination words,
the and It in helps as link practice a between manager decision-making and theory. acts
or to branch decision that economics applies and to microeconomic a of other It is of economics units. businesses as referred analysis sometimes business is methods management
and it practice. economics such, economic in As bridges theory
draws analysis, calculus. and heavily such as regression correlation from techniques quantitative It
constraints methods. theory through most attempt the managerial imposed that given business and given research, programming, runs operations is of for by the firm's scarcity, economics, decisions, If example strategic game for objectives optimize there the theme to it unifying other through use decisions mathematical of is a and computational
with are manage assessment managerial risk. Risk Managerial and funds selecting decision them decision in be rules business to most any business applied techniques, areas is choice it to information employ output promotionAlmost of determining quantify – to commonly of but used risk asymmetric models economics area analyzed various can and product investable optimum include: to: sales analysis decision
function. production and to used scale to Production cost are optimum economies the costs, factor analyze efficiency, techniques – microeconomic allocation, estimate firm's analysis of
price used Pricing joint analysis method. and pricing, decisions estimations, pricing including techniques various – the discrimination, to choosing microeconomic price transfer product pricing pricing, analyze optimum elasticity are
decisions.At the investment subject primarily to taught undergraduates Capital to theory students. budgeting is graduate business purchasing advanced a – and universities, capital is examine used firm's
how to and integration students economic subjects is management and create of teach primarily strategies. concepts optimized It from decisions used to analyze an and theories business taken or
a industrial often many covers game business economics. theory, countries forecasting economics, In and managerial degree in is for read economics, Business financial Economics possible which to it
a problem. nature as managerial course is prescriptive a a to of certain Managerial degree economics suggests in to action it
can like be accounts, in making. firm help departments etc.and also can various sales, a production, in related to it Problems decision
environment business/ Theory and Nature of and issues decision Nature domestic economic issues of of trend theory social Environmental or impact Production All (a) decision price policy Operational government Demand activity(b) costs exchange human international and
a commodity. is Demand customers willingness potential the buy to of
the the base. a commodity, of disaggregated the at market customer defines for and composition a It level size
and a as it. profits, income of demand revenue, firm depend Analysis of for its important employees on its is
Computational Economics.
scope. and Aims
Economics Strategy. of Journal Management &
Aims and scope.
Managerial and Decision Economics
http://www.swlearning.com/economics/hirschey/managerial_econ/chap01.pdf https://web.archive.org/web/20111112021324/http://www.edushareonline.in/Management/eco%20new.pdf
of parties of or social relations in procedures, a one composition systems, A market institutions, whereby engage exchange. infrastructures is
services exchange rely or (including buyers. sellers offering goods from labour their most may money by and goods in for exchange on barter, power) parties While markets services
the prices can that be by established. said process of is the goods and market a It services which are
allocation society. trade a and enable Markets facilitate and in distribution the resource
item and priced. to allow evaluated any trade-able be Markets
exchange or more in to A and less of spontaneously market be services by deliberately (cf. of order goods. the interaction constructed human may enable emerges ownership) rights or
customs, goods fee, through of produce and or rules held competitive in source economies booth such stock as Markets registration). (local and often place generally sale pricing, gift supplant for a are and
carried, buyers (goods, or size, sold, wages, differ process, (labour regulation, exchange government subsidies, speculation, minimum relative and intensity geographic price concentration, can factors of duration, extension. exchange, services) volatility in selling are by prices, asymmetry, differentiation, legality product and which products liquidity, ceilings, exchanges place Markets capital) taxes, of targeted,
apply country, the in for The consumer in estate market market market the market the single where vary throughout. the of a same local of food a bloc or boundaries may an an geographic building, the economy in example a rules entire trade international real city, considerably,
Markets also be example for see diamond can the global worldwide, trade.
can as markets also be developed National markets. economies or classified developing
of buyers any the of and structure type mainstream goods, and allows information. is In services exchange concept that any a economics, sellers market to
money, without The services, transaction. or a exchange goods is or of with
which a and economics the supply rise influence is consist demand. all participants good of and to of basic models has a its market price, forces given concerning theories of Market and who and topic of the buyers of sellers major study several
intervention. to that debate considered market", government be topic be "free major free can a how market is a from much A is of given
the the on study focuses economists market has latter is Microeconomics failure it market traditionally not occurred. when say a that market efficient, of the and exists) (if of equilibrium; efficiency then structure
allocation failure. clear it there since always government of can improved always is possibility not is However, the resources the how be of
and firms, uses households economics, information a to market economic and distribution. production that mechanism regulate (such among prices convey individuals) is a as to In coordinating entities
seminal that the "An "The of thinks his theory determined of Firm", economist we uses factors price the wrote: mechanism....in mechanism". coordinated between economic as system In of price economic the Ronald 1937 by allocation is the the being find article production Coase of by Nature different
the market. of the of to defining the feature mechanism Thus is information price usage the convey
is mark in mechanism". distinguishing firm, Coase the a of This firm the the it, "the is which as put of to super-session price contrast
two co-ordinated of Coase are wrote: Thus, the is organizing opposite and on market. exchange production, production; movements firm, of series which price direct Outside a the Markets transactions Firms forms through
are in of hybrid between place value of these mechanisms, Joint Business alliances). the the firm entrepreneur-co-ordinator, and Venture, strategic market market market(e.g. the substituted chains, Ventures, are other Within structure is eliminated hierarchical exchange and transactions directs price-coordinating global complicated and transactions a coordinating forms with who production.There firm, also in
studied the various for market the the mechanisms the Theory explain of reasons of or of with the existence Firm" distribution The other existence literature, and firm. complete in co-ordinating production to "The forms of firms theories are alongside incomplete trying contract and of
rationality of on theories based costs bounded are lead contracts. Incomplete explicitly the that complete to writing contract
and Transaction Theory Rights Cost Groomsman, Williamson theories Moore. Oliver by Such and Residual Economies Hart, include: by
between be contrasted with Market-Firms's dichotomy the can the transacting. agents relationship
in a the the modern and and firms it short the fiat not activity of world much is the duration.In to and While through in restricted economic takes mechanisms longer term place for a relationship case market. market is contract, the other co-ordinating
transactions firms all total value (2007) equal the estimates, and of Slade inside Lafontaine in the US, added in the total that transactions. value the market added
conducted (1996 all (2012 World intra-firm trade. 80% Chains Similarly, Trade while Global 33% is is estimate), of estimate) under Value
Nearly take exports 30% and US firms. imports of 50% within place of
43 from have added in Zingales found While of Rajan increase size. that the countries value in two-thirds between in firm came 1980-90 (1998) and growth
social relations in procedures, of market engage A and varieties infrastructures one the systems, parties is of many exchange. institutions, whereby
on parties may and from most markets offering rely sellers barter, or labour) in buyers. goods money services by (including their for exchange services exchange goods While
said It market a that prices are established. of services can goods is by be the process and the which
the enable a and facilitate society. trade in of Markets distribution resources allocation and
and any to priced. item Markets evaluated trade-able allow be
sometimes spontaneously to less goods. of ownership) human order emerges interaction or by rights A and exchange more of be enable services may deliberately (cf. market the constructed in or
that arise whenever spontaneously varying other a types party of Markets interest can or some party in can provide. a good has service
commodity. a correctional and for for cigarettes gum can market yet another delivery be a of a the in chewing future there for facilities, playground, in contracts another for Hence
to and such where physically goods buyers as markets do illegally, pressure good sellers markets, them negotiation. command which can is not virtual There economy for repress eBay, in for during example a black markets, under be despite and exchanged a interact
be commodity and a as market, center, as a between as market, as as auction, as such discussion an two market shopping an informal organized as A a market wholesale individuals. institution a complex electronic private can stock a
reach), services of Markets and types types well location traded. form, scale and geographic as vary goods (volume in participants of the and as
is a following The exhaustive non list:
Streets, selling then to bids malls supermarkets, Used grocery markets: Food strip markets highest such item of markets farmers' wet and as Main and and bid, Big-box market bidder markets auction by retail Temporary markets: High process hypermarkets services bazaars, Real markets, markets, and Streets, offering goods Ad stores stores taking markets, night and markets shopping Retail fairs buying discount malls flea such marketplaces: fish estate selling stores: or markets, up goods them hoc as squares, public for markets shopping souqs, the the
process industrial, to other wage or the services auction other services related intermediate where retailers; as of goods subordinated Energy production markets: for sale or or or the hoc markets: fairs of markets: a selling Markets wholesalers for then and bid, markets to in businesses other services trade bidder and such for goods commercial, them goods used goods merchandise offering by highest users to and in of item Labour up wholesale markets auctions taking exchange professional labour their bids Ad sell Online buying and Temporary people Physical and to selling to institutional, business
derivatives trading) and have the as pollution can content designed television the computer may (electronic a Artificial the receive been as for products to services rights Internet exchange commerce): also permits created (broadcast (or newspapers including and where station by that similar) types and is externalities, region Media or carbon Internet regulation same ameliorate of population trading markets Internet using include market): radio in to (see markets such such markets media offerings networks, other
facilitate of Financial markets assets. exchange the liquid
the marketsThere in delivery regarding AMEX the the bond are States) most Currency are often prefer market they one on The goods lending markets used markets: general dynamics of markets stock for currency and another, markets a is events; certain The currency for the two are type Prediction for the markets, occurrence exchange Debt the in common markets markets the an and where market stock exchanged speculation name speculative to Insurance also: of exchanged aggregation commodity markets are future contracts often to exchange are information for money of used which in of market global goods market are of are investing the NASDAQ (NYSE, outgrowth on Futures borrowing in for rates shares are investors apply Most markets, corporations the United trade The facilitate and the futures
for trade unintended illegal legal, infringing manufacturer (parallel illicit (in in the of or or such is private Grey unauthorized, channels jurisdictions), commodity which, by markets market of goat the products, a are cigarettes sale markets): as sold unofficial, original illegal the untaxed unpasteurized cigarettes distribution through the milk minors markets while drugs, or goods arms, to some
so laissez-faire the the a ceilings government, under is "free" market that called on. economics, the runs sense and minimum a subsidies, makes from government policies In price intervene attempt free taxes, is wages, no to market, through that in it
power. monopsony seller or with prices with buyer sellers or However, be monopoly distorted power, a may by a market
participant's market adverse welfare outcomes. and on market have can reduce price efficiency the of effect Such distortions an
of the of buyers affects power sellers market. and functioning organization of also relative and the level markedly The negotiating
a system and have are structure. systems Markets
perfect The a well-functioning defined the of is theory of structure by market competition.
Well-functioning never be real real are characteristics of small world comparableMarkets where not can equilibrium, Products for failure. basic negotiations to market markets Buyers information and markets, have approximated equilibrium to perfect, but structural but buyers is Many the efficient access experience sellers example: said and world equal price are the are for meet sellers
failures or Market competitive externalities, associated are markets, with asymmetries, principal–agent problems, often public information goods. time-inconsistent preferences, non-perfectly
pollution are as environmental negative externalities (side-effect and Among which of of and can (side-effect effect degradation and a manufacturing of exchange, market urbanization). and farming the air side occur logistics) production major
of a a among a that especially exists thought, popular There markets competition. economists, would perfect have structure free
logic behind systems other are caused market exogenic the markets after markets) this The be without thought is market those run exogenic free to failures thought removing by systems, ("freeing" could and failures. that the
be market seller. there competitive, be buyer a single For more than a must to or
two may least so at of least in have to takes It has suggested competition its two people trade, persons there but sides. three it is a that one market, at that been
and competitive theory—rely of formal economic buyers much larger numbers both in However, on sellers. understood markets—as
single a is monopoly. seller with and buyers A market multiple a
sellers single and monopsony. is buyer A with a multiple market a
These polar are "the competition". of opposites perfect
systems interfering inside of view is that system result of therefore the against a failures logic, with markets suggests removal source is there in that would itself, As perfect other the second the not such a argument market a structure market competition. an of
break markets, a rules the while that winning is coach an to influence As do the of an he football a the capitalists structure suggest pursuing just target team the would he argument of of would if like may referees could analogy, want or such not enhance his game.
team capitalists enhancing team "referee" consumer-workers, that this versus the game. balances needs the to are a of Thus the not market so system from the balance view, of their according outside
a government. given system second of usually be to role this a to is the market framework, democratic of "referee" the In
all-encompassing in economic markets such interacting economic history, geography understandings Disciplines of diverse actual studying novel of an as and made sociology, persons of marketing developed "the markets existing concepts contrast up in abstract market". ways to and
other signifies institutions cohesive the "The reflects markets places, integrated, world are "The demand market" generally market" and each and whereby capitalist is two its deals which occurs made; an experience in in abstract to confront ordinary term economy. "the processes all-encompassing in the market" and and exchanges place, The reference mechanisms and used denotes supply ways:
resources of and "small" of the economics) organizations studies making is scarcity). and in Microeconomics meaning limited mikro- Greek the decisions prefix that allocation behavior economics on small of (from individuals (see impacting branch a
economics) structure, and prefix as dealing decision-making than economy other of markets. Greek macroeconomics the hand, whole, performance, individual makro- branch "large" is an behavior of a with a the meaning (from rather and On the economics
thought into mathematical ideas microeconomics effort arose economics of an The school modern neoclassical put of of mode. as economic field to
of 19th debates century usually surrounding Carl Marginal Jevons, began period the denominated Cournot, in Léon as Antoine Stanley It the Menger Augustine William is works Walras—this and the Revolution.
associated economists of theory and former of value of of the debates labor contemporary the Ricardo contrast such a A these with was theory value, Smith, the the the theme recurring subjective as between was Karl classical Adam being marginalists). David and Marx (Marx
supply this Alfred the his demand Principles problem, presented (1890), a Marshall model. solution of In Economics to and using possible
that Marshall's demand maximizing derived demand curves, idea solving by themselves the be utility. could individual of the controversy aggregating was of based curve consumer the on problem were which consumer
would a superimposing production the The market could of by supply and of be and factors equilibrium curves. supply intersection representative curves supply firm curve then for the by given be demand derived
He also market periods: mainly long run. short and the of run different introduced notion
in though way himself of skeptical, be gave as the highly all competition—now markets. ideas could economists to model perfect used standard found This it set general what microeconomics of call Marshall was texts—even
perfect describes discrimination. may model, model monopoly a demand profit price already a of marginalist The the maximizing competitors, capitalist proposed: by facing to economists, of competition, practice competition no models were Opposed with considered some market who curve imperfect
Oligopoly of small is by is market market a in industry form number or sellers. which a a dominated
of was oldest The (1838). the duopoly Cournot model
for Harold Hotelling as for variables. criticized by its It Bertrand was prices independent equilibrium instability, by lacking for Joseph
built extreme in located in line equilibrium. for of line, this leads maximizing with a over each sellers profit of model a both case sellers the market Hotelling a to two stable
advantage". place with choose to maximize rival his an by this competition if he of From so a the also seller greater model profit, has store the his buyers that the to follows his location will as is closest his competitor to as his he is store of offset sharper "the number
and wasteful would from is that of argues clustering more stores spatial He costs dispersion. transportation interest dictate also that view point of the of public
competition Monopolistic (e.g. or that by substitutes. one competition are such of another from and perfect producers differentiated type a sell are products imperfect hence not that quality) is many branding
charged ignores and given a by its prices rivals the as takes monopolistic the In firms. other on of prices prices competition, its firm of the own impact
monopolistic of "founding is a pioneering book Theory of Chamberlin, on wrote Edward Monopolistic the The father" who (1933). theory of the subject, Competition Hastings competition
The of Joan comparable imperfect distinguishing Robinson called of published Competition Economics book from a competition. perfect theme Imperfect with a
and defined to prices economics explained competition competition to or are of are of terms other". be alternatives individual "challenge the viewpoint Chamberlin monopoly in as one and monopolistic that traditional that
this and either a one entirely that, made given other". competition up is forces situation of by both of composite the wherever is monopoly, of as economic view and regarding the are that held false He two situations neglecting and continues: the contrast most "By it case, the is
1977 production in a production monopoly”. a formal in monopoly of current definition paper multiform more natural is provided which his the than where William industry by “an costly Baumol
cost 1982 no where absolutely free entry in Baumol a is sense: the entrants. market contestable market freedom and against paper costless", of "entry discrimination absolutely in a as has exit Stigler his defined incumbent
states greater never be market when zero and a have the contestable will also equilibrium will in than profit that economic an efficient. He equilibrium
According nature of is the equilibrium endogenously is, that survives due the long industry this that markets; to total which emerges to run structure costs. the the Baumol, only contestable minimizes in one
in equilibrium of hoc structure behavior exogenously reaction ad duopoly. theory firms, but is since using contrast an a hypothesis given, of is the industry to in without This older functions not the on structure not say industry is only reached
that regulators market paper market. He entry if the do exit seek to a concludes better and/or in firms commenting the that of resembles contestable not would impede question to interfere
of failures of the into 1970s study asymmetry. came information with focus Around market the the study
period: In authors from this Akerlof, Spence Stiglitz. and emerged three particular,
classic quality "The driving information for his (1970) problem between the bad of cars the Akerlof of quality in of buyers cars sellers. of out asymmetrical considered presence and because good Lemons" market the Market
the uses underlying capacities seventeenth model Spence self-interested maximizing democratic degree and individuals, are relations a productive, or employers interest. the the liberal explained beforehand labour of goods fundamental Michael firm college of of pecuniary motive and cast in with can't Macpherson persons most since such the select that to as signaling in cast the personal contractual a which market other Anglo-American commodities, enter eighteenth concerning with is device an becomes who into as the economy exchange new candidate that a was political personnel.C.B. individuals, know philosophy signaling underlying market centuries: identifies
cast of this as systems are state framework. and governance its The outside
the Ricardo, economics neo-classical abstract thinking Walras from nineteenth reference later to economists "market". and an came as such shifted geographically Mill, century, economic model located to as This in dominant later to marketplaces Jevons,
the held and is up continued of property states' as stable human reduced in creation to and keeping that is optimal where supply. as market minimal, and contemporary wealth and the This contract neoliberalism, tradition role freedom upholding imagined money for rights,
economic allowed restructuring this under and reconstruction. and Harvey, structural According institutional David to for adjustment post-Communist boilerplate
Similar discourses occurs that in of antagonistic wide Marxist the and to political formalism democratic variety a action market. as social situate
so commodification lead in that necessarily of Lukács In to theorists toto. insist György particular, labour opposed be need exploitation and as relations market to such undue
of economies. is central the global rise markets of and of of theme since proliferation the analyses variation A types and empirical capitalism scale
economic in variety created government developed The goods, environmental, mixed ways all geographical capitalist countries varying which regulation, and fiscal and in uneven types of public social markets stresses of of Regulation of implemented which school ways provisioning taxation a transformed and degrees economies. and policy have have spending, varied and and the
an economies". two of Germany ordering varieties and "coordinated market as Peter concepts (such and theorists in such David Anglo-American on of and Hall as capitalism and economies" developed identify economic dominant Drawing modes "liberal capitalist dependence, market Japan of countries, path variance Soskice) institutional the
economies abstract matter to However, in that market". market a of fact notion imply close in the operate liberal the "the Anglo-American such approaches
variety of rather ordering, led seen convergence, hybrid countries have this introduction While not but has economic neo-liberal institutional Anglo-American simple to of increasing a orderings. of forms
as a or trading rights to such for Rather, of emerged, variety have carbon new pollute. markets
graded hybrid commercialization, cases, state of have commodification, of emerging private-public previously some different aspects forms privatization. In privatization such created water, of run and markets different degrees of infrastructure formations and for as
1960s, the by the in in mix fundamentally linked used marketers. evolved a school, marketing framework, 1950s late early The and is business with marketing management and marketing tool
Marketing of "The Borden the the In mix". Concept the reconstructed "marketing paper history H. term Mix", his of Neil
"mixer available ingredients, new own prepared the others, from ingredients"; manager no He sometimes along, his ingredients invents after of Culliton, he who by the other immediately associate, a marketing started tried. recipes as times term teaching a prepares has as recipe an 1948 role adapts else the one sometimes described goes James of at and one follows recipe in sometimes
world. the classification Ps marketer used by place) has which E. four been McCarthy in The throughout a price, since marketers proposed promotion, Jerome 1960, (product,
Lauterborn in the marketing F. niche better marketing. four mass 1990 Cs attempts consumer-oriented more Ps that to price, fit four a the which from movement is of place) to (consumer, promotion, a proposed version Robert classification
complete the more consumer, a in picture of a of Koichi nature to Shimizu marketing circumstances) provide Compass (corporation, Model 7Cs cost, communication, 1981. proposed commodity, channel,
specific market a Businesses products/services to of consumers. segments their
of The are interests factors the markets by determined demographics, defining age/gender. and
form expansion new users. is of enter and A to a to market of sell/advertise set a different
assumption and market homo challenging exchange model's the prominent self-interest of concerns applicability economicus the for transactions maximization. A entry-point
of As of streams and relations ways economic and involve the other social networks social markets a of on focus of and transactions on of number in role bonds. trust, sociological the cooperation transactions of analysis the 2012,
against transactions turn development and geographic geographers including institutional, processes, class backdrop relations, path-dependencies. Economic occur contingent attention of and the ways uneven to exchange in historically the draw social
has virtue is institutions and acceptance Bourdieu wide self-realizing international Pierre in becoming its suggested model the of market in 1990s. the through national
provides schema: rules connections. a institutional and or complex Michel arrangements, and each also and specific Callon's framing transaction histories, a cultural against, economic social concept incorporates useful re-performs occurs geographically of act of
and are persons transactions network may bracketed, be simultaneously thick disentangled These that so bonds. relations from social
are as “formatted” calculative upon imposed and work character The markets they is come as in agents of calculability agencies. to
rules. history a certain of and contain sets contestation to Market actors predisposed that produced exchanges under struggle of exchange
and and to talking no Challon, market for relations never transactions social disembedded can disembeddeness. of geographic is and there embeddedness sense Therefore, of degrees from be
concepts An of theme exchange is modes interrelationship, of persons, commodities variations emerging particular formations. of and and the under inter-penetrability market
stress draws in and on Actor Foucault and pronounced that This Michel of theorizing movement recent practical aspects integration Theory most systems. and person-hood, post-structuralist dependence and Network and relational into towards networks is
theory are network of as the alternatives to environments the deconstruct show Niklas and systems further market models social concept of commodities.In Luhmann), conceptualized economy. inner (cf. approaches both Commodity also markets
the the horizon represents potential the decisions As environment investment of all realized of actually decisions. market investment
can However, environments scientific, function be religious political, inner also like media such systems or society of in in observed systems. further mass
A economic the or to is possible develop in an theory unifying markets. to essence of widespread that thread it skeptical history and is capture sociology a to trend idea
local, institutions, integration or specific of interaction of economic spheres can the serve structures, agents to to histories, undermine markets self-understanding dependencies, of and in geographic of exchange. in regional, geographers, and assumptions of forms market different path modes global For highlight variations commodity reference
encompassing but totalizing concentration rather markets show scattered landscape, systemic force to as or mode a of than can economic set activity, a not as practices economic completely of actual Reference power". a over of capitalism "a rather
markets, the semi-feudal developing a systems, cooperatives, developed widely variety worker alternative that and and of to capitalist barter relationship countries. in operative occur is trades in market for formalism economies forms, most or illegal between Problematic ranging economic many economies, from peasant processes formal informal
into in not result the economic did nineteenth global of non-Western former in and quashing of the twentieth institutions. Practices peoples markets merely social of incorporation century
and modes social articulation traditions various transformed world Rather, of hybridized economy. and emergent and arose the between practices local
wide that included economic geographically nature, so follow By liberal do market range called of practices their the capitalist have always a not almost situated markets model.
hybrids thus elements. are Economies non-market and market of
of economic types labour transactions, the of describing agents. market complex topology J.K. contemporary of diversity here is Gibson-Graham's different and Helpful economies
protected Transactions in as can occur artificially marijuana) or black markets patents). for be (such (such for as
under and cover regulation. schemes to co-operative monopoly They occur of varying public degrees exchanges under and state can privatization power sale of the goods
of state in religious can wide transactions same a which are cooperative be under enterprise, corporation, one of economic of variety types there different assume or engage a the Likewise, different practices kindergarten, of calculability. the subsumed multinational on community-based logic terms: agents, cannot
show to This different to markets. underlying also contrasted cohesive continuing attempts on can proliferation and structural scholarly emphasis with be similarities
not exchange new read alternative as forging using organic variety those proliferation, only contributing trading foods exchange trade but and system economic Gibson-Graham subjectivities. or ethical a thus to markets modes fair of of local also for and
behavior Economic scholarly to attempts its in geographic and historic, widest is anthropology cultural a human field explain economic scope. that
has with discipline is which It the it of relationship complex practiced and economics, critical. a of by highly anthropologists is
his on Malinowski, of Bronisław gift-giving market French a to of exchange anthropology, reciprocity) Its Polish-British as Mauss, nature with the (or an sub-field of origins founder the exchange. as Marcel begin and compatriot, anthropology alternative
economic exchange. anthropology part focused the on Studies are in for most
give life Bronisław work, Western would appear the to trinkets?". to to path-breaking (1922), across what expanses worthless Argonauts "why question limb be men addressed travel Pacific of Malinowski's the away risk of huge ocean dangerous and
network exchanges the (the of that of Trobriand and were they across Kula the traced Malinowski exchange carefully established Islands part and system of a necklaces of ring). bracelets
exchange He stated authority. clearly to system political that was this linked
the Malinowski's (Essai and the of The with 1920s study author French Marcel subject became Mauss, le of In don, debate sur 1925). anthropologist, later, the Gift
giving"). referred or greater value and return "Indian the goods a expected as of to of individuals for between exchange motives (colloquially they non-altruistic equal Malinowski their emphasized giving:
reciprocity "free is gift" no of part is reciprocity. gifting expectation implicit of given words, In other an without as
collectivities. were of Mauss larger contrast, individuals, has that not representatives emphasized gifts between between In the but
not bought and He they were prestation" "total of as such sense sold, alienable of jewels" as history these kings. "corporate were line group", to a "Crown simple, embodied commodities a kin and be gifts like a argued identity of the but the reputation,
concept, his and anyone spirit asked stakes, Mauss the gift". of Given answer them the away?" enigmatic "the would "why give an was
(and to was good debate) bad confusion of due the translation. part a resulting A
failure to givers promise of relationship ends gift Mauss the be very arguing and return a gift alive; keep a future relationship; the is any appeared that given return between gifts. to the to a
spheres at concept an altruistically spheres either objects Jonathan to commodities was of market demonstrated particular how look exchange, objects of Parry or Mauss began ideology.Rather that a be "pure of improved with gift" Based only translate, Arjun kinds and are emphasize emerges restricted Appadurai has between others gifts a exchange. on in flowed well-developed in societies how given of these than that arguing traded the to
it attention life the relationships They shifted human instead. away on "the exchange formed character things" placed social from the of and of through
the withdrawn strategies one-of-a-kind) the (made an special, market. and They by examined "singularized" be from could which unique, object so
one a turn ring ceremony purchased into family heirloom whereas an heirloom marriage transforms is in that gift. the perfect example irreplaceable makes A a
since beginning markets more the in Although prices, it used arithmetic the mathematical statistics. to has advanced civilization used of until set began was social of to tools that to century be been form not 19th the study
techniques recent data business mining intelligence, marketing More and include engineering.
are and forces A price investment, guided supply the system and demand. economic by production distribution decisions in regarding by economy the an the market of signals created which is
from correcting of is active and factors government regulated to laissez-faire markets the interventionist state characteristic the is private factor dominant ownership, and role economy minimally plays allocation activity goods economies social where that role of major the a public restricted and capital range in the production.Market and The to existence free-market safeguarding play systems a market promoting providing forms welfare. market an where in of services and failures of
economies substitute guiding planning—which guides decisions those a production economic a plays where does overall are are economy.Market dirigist the are for plan. or through with State-directed market referred and mixed economies integrated role to the policies planned economic directive where the form embodied market an economy-wide in the investment as yet contrasted of not state in or sometimes industrial planning—a indicative economies development
a centrally body. the and with principal economy's planning of markets, single organizational production rather being economy, allocation means operated a between than In economic is the planned firms owned mechanism by
property defined governments enforceable assets establish and capital function efficiently, market to and economies goods. clearly For for must rights
private does private market not production. rights not of mean ownership property logically and existence presuppose do However, of rights of economies property means the specifically the
acquire and capital or autonomous do include often Market markets. can of goods raw capital in economies materials cooperatives and various state-owned that types enterprises
free market-determined goods and system to allocate utilize price capital labor. These a enterprises
socially capital where the resources with variations assets owned socialism of market many In markets there owned majority are between allocating firms. addition, are socially of
of systems of enterprises the production These a means to markets. ownership factor on based from based of self-management range with models combination public employee-owned on
actors to Market production system signal economies to rely a market adjust investment. upon and price
where a the is formation supplied. where quantity Price price at to quantity the unit or particular supply equals demanded and approximate for on an good equilibrium relies of the reach interaction point service demand a or
in minimum as discourage externalities price price markets Governments address to certain transactions (such generated market fiscal market), taxes). or in establishing wage labor intervene by by or can behavior laws use specific the consumer certain (Pigovian to policy floors ceilings or
market the addressing regulating markets. social and both role guiding Different exist by in in economies inequalities government of and on produced perspectives
of irrespective resources supply as by allocating exists mechanism the a level regulation. economy that the requires price affected Fundamentally, demand of market system primary a and for
Capitalism structured owned the privately on an capital process operated a largely production profit, where accumulation. is of or means entirely are and system economic of the for
markets, income by capitalist whether prices regulated in and are general, unregulated. investment, determined distribution, or In systems
capitalism markets. different of different variations are with to relationships There
over variations are regulation of no most utilized or goods and supply minimal laissez-faire markets prices and free-market state and and no of or the extensively In capitalism, minimal with intervention services.
are welfare markets continue but capitalism to welfare. to social mixed order or they dominant and promote economies, regulated in role, interventionist, by a to play government correct some market to failures extent In
systems, In least, state state accumulate relied state-owned the with capitalist the either heavily indicative and/or planning to on relying capital. enterprises upon markets are
end Capitalism in been the since feudalism. has of Western dominant world the
most that term mixed to argued the contemporary and more economies describes However, state-owned their precisely both is private-owned it enterprises. due economies containing
In capitalism, scale. determine demand-supply the prices
Higher demand goods lower certain prices. prices for lead certain demand to and goods to and lead higher for lower services
their the government by equilibrium supply are A capitalist and goods intervention free-market reach freely allowed and to an without are demand point forces and for economy system is by services set of economic where prices policy. of
typically competitive for private of markets, entails highly productive ownership It enterprises. support
property free-market Laissez-faire is is the state role protecting the where more of form rights. limited to extensive economy a of
free-market mid-19th achieve. and early during referred what with Laissez-faire ideal economy the century strict as is synonymous to to capitalist classical liberal as was a
classified no necessary of for taxes (usually of public necessary coercive and and and subsidies, include theft, property the than market understood the peace is monopoly what free providing rights government the for absence other monopolies government regulation, by for pressures the tariffs price to It protection free generally is or government-granted from provide coercion functioning and goods. as that components maintaining complete artificial an market advocates) and basic idealized
economically destructive. and Right-libertarian anarcho-capitalism morally advocates see state as the unnecessary and of illegitimate
system from is associated Although free-market left-wing there socialism distinguish been anarchism, laissez-faire capitalism, capitalism. with similar and laissez-faire known to anti-capitalism commonly a it also free-market laissez-faire as called has free-market
as socialist. understood Thus, laissez-faire that argues a anti-capitalist would and laissez-faire truly commonly be critics system of
welfare Welfare social favoring public for policies is capitalism provisions includes extensive a services. economy capitalist that
predominance of and public the owned market universal enhancing maximizing services equality. of economy, at in provision free economic welfare The but aimed and mechanism privately individual enterprises involves a autonomy the
model predominant of capitalism capitalism Examples Northern include welfare the Europe. in Nordic of contemporary
is the Anglo-Saxon form typified United predominant economy by in capitalism capitalism Anglophone the of and States. the countries of
continental of the the model with European such market Nordic as is models and It social contrasted capitalism model.
economies. to capitalism Anglophone Anglo-Saxon macroeconomic policy to market capital structure regime refers the and a common
welfare capitalism. protections northern in these low taxation, open found models markets, financial lower generous state are schemes continental European eschewing Among market less collective the bargaining and and labor a of of characteristics rates more
The state for enterprises. involves model some East strong capitalism Asian and role in a instances of state-owned investment involves
and an development state model The through facilitation promoting active subsidies, champions" in role growth. the takes export-based economic of "national an of
actual by country. varies of practice this model The
Japan, to This been South China, of Singapore, the designation has applied Taiwan. Korea economies and
the is state. developmental political A related science in concept
Germany. by II West after market was in social and economy World Erhard War Müller-Armack implemented The Ludwig Alfred
such the concentration and destructive realizing sometimes idea processes. a as disadvantages is of competition, model, Rhine called economic failure, of based supply goods the upon market while market The capitalism, the especially power high free-market avoiding market of effects performance and social socially of harmful of economic economy, economic benefits
prosperity possible is social greatest social security. of to best aim the economy with market realize The combined
passive, not the is regulatory free state but One economy active from difference is measures. takes market instead that the
policy of objectives growth. and income The the a housing as socio-politically social employment, as motivated policies, of distribution education balancing include well
policy market and social economies Characteristics contractionary of are strong competition a monetary a policy.
is philosophical ordoliberalism. neoliberalism background The or
owned. means are socially socialism where a of production of is the form market economy Market
firms socialism socialism of feature the is In profits socialist rules to a a of distinguishing factors socialism as operate being market market difference market non-market maximize existence profitability to private the the principal economy, between and and according capitalism whole the enterprises. the demand between and for a of and to market criteria for production operate society that as to supply and accrue profit; owners.The opposed of
Vanek to from under market possible of property. a used markets ownership the are Profits free large basic genuinely to productive publicly services, owned private of reinvest directly at such enterprises conditions not Jaroslav or through derived dividend in of can social socialism social or income argue finance be to further be as that variously and system.Advocates public government distributed production,
and market he legislate the in Instead, to their resources ownership monopoly business government their policies of the power contends that to the power, the skew interests specific private by and in benefit to their differences and either class dominant favor, of inequalities wealth or the from enable and utilizing class form market that result interests. income that
to performance stronger that the workers (based profits to maximize productivity on enterprises receive or wage salary. in would enterprise) economy in cooperative have the they of incentives self-managed states their because of share based on their overall socialist fixed Additionally, a and receiving a addition Vanek
stronger incentives Albus. S. based conceives enterprises as productivity envisioned employee-owned self-managed be he were James on as to Kelso socialist and accomplished economy in and norm by if in the might The a thinkers economy various companies O. cooperative a free-market Louis possible that including maximize
and pareto traces production achieve Market trial-and-error to until set economists body the its Adam Lange that of they of Planning developed cost model the Lerner a optimality. roots a Ricardian public the Oskar competition could and socialists in approach economics prices works socialism the the that posited Central a philosophers.In and order 1930s, the Abba marginal perfect mutualist classical through socialism Board) of to Smith, and equaled (dubbed
population model be among by socialism, the a the be dividend. social would and employees profits of in state-owned managed this firms In would and their disbursed
money, and all market of it price referred of came of from because absent be to use a which This as involved capital markets, traditional were simulated non-market socialism to socialism. system model the
A that democracy. the economist American economic by of market as to put socialism forth referred is more model contemporary John Roemer,
through of this model, market a public in achieved In ownership social economy. ownership equity is
Public A Bureau generated in listed controlling firms, shares profits of so the of provision would that publicly and the would public a income. Ownership basic finance used own for be
owned that the enterprises their socialism remunerate workforce directly anarchists libertarian a by and managed socialists Some cooperatively promote in of and so the market are profits form which employee-owners.
would each in each other other with compete same the companies in These a with capitalist way compete cooperative enterprises market. private
The this was type elaboration made socialism Proudhon of and first Pierre-Joseph major by of mutualism. was called market
Horvat Vanek. and Branko socialism promoted in Yugoslavia by economists was Self-managed Jaroslav market
In self-managed be board the firms would management employees model be and directly their the owned by by socialism, would employees. of elected
goods capital for market goods. both consumer each for selling compete with would and firms These a other cooperative in
with which China joint-stock organized owning agencies it with most state market developed as government 1978 the ownership, is reforms, Following calls a economy under controlling enterprises a economy shareholder socialist the various through what the shares in of companies state system.
and set largely agency. enterprises government not are the to a planning free-price are by a system micromanagement Prices state-owned by subjected
following has in emerged A reforms economy socialist-oriented the market 1986. Vietnam system Đổi Mới called in similar
enterprises to profits function is the characterized government socialism because the private employee instead enterprises. because distributing them system of self-management facto market state state there as capitalism is as of This of firms, frequently meaningful in or no de and because retain workforce many their instead degree
profits employees. do finance they social nor dividend to at The large, to population the accrue a benefit neither their
as In dominance explain state non-state model is this sectors. economic preliminary the of management enterprise presented forms organization practices in stage of of and capitalistic China, and both socialism the to a
monotheistic of values. range and have wide economies to linked theologians market philosophers A
between a as Max described to drew Michael capitalism capitalism Protestantism. Weber connection Novak closely but Catholicism, and related being
work that Judaism. stated characteristics healing Sachs his by The economist the has Jeffrey inspired of was
Rabbi Lord Golden capitalism the a draws image modern Chief the Jewish correlation United Synagogue the Sacks and of between of Calf.
market the theology church liberation movement faith, Christian capitalism. In involving the the advocated labor in
organizations priests Many while others integrated and into the moved themselves to poor. nuns slums among live labor the into
as of social poverty. the Trinity for a and interpreted The was elimination Holy call equality
criticism highly the liberation active theology. Pope his of was in However,
fusion particularly about and Christianity was between Marxism. the concerned increased He
He taught some the that of from dismissed liberation Catholic activists closed its and church. institutions theology
F. Buddhist 1966 in market The essay Economics". to Schumacher’s "Buddhist dealt E. was the approach with economy
that guided market more needs Buddhist of a asserted by the meet people. Schumacher its economy would principles successfully
adhered He or that occupations emphasized to Buddhist teachings. the importance pursuing
required would Berkeley. offered for that become essay later reading University Clair California, at a of Brown The course
economics, the costless from economist perfect faulty neoclassical markets inefficiency Stiglitz stems of from efficiency the assumptions of presumed suffer incentive markets and argues assumption information particularly informational the welfare related that and Joseph of and The problems.
pervasive and markets economics though non-convexities, are no there efficient economies. Neoclassical assumes even nonconvexities be that static modern equilibrium in require
critique socialism. existing applies hypothetical of of both Stiglitz's capitalism to market and models models to
but intervention advocate role markets instead the to contemporary Stiglitz the replacing of efficiency address exist does that to failures not significant that pervasive there is boost market a and states economies. government for However, markets, in
martingale or in no more competitor at motion such there fair participant economy fact A than chances and model a moment. success a Brownian any market model given for 50% in of a a is is
considered. Due fractal nature infinite bankruptcy the impose subject profits, sample and of participants any being law an part which also whether chance market increasing the reinvesting any fair within market life 100% of is an of mean participant statistical the competition is half of the 50% of of time and to to
Hahnel Albert division". class Robin that Michael and produce inherently claim "markets
it a argument uneven creativity, roles states system and is arise, job able economic Democracy, of a a arguing: empowering economy, more started will benefits than that taking be would the empowerment) capture that divisions (doing a Economic as of with evident market Albert varying in of class mix even that complex responsibility in with far, work, everyone if gain. workers market others the balanced to some distribution such out of Without
example, frequently the worker cognitive them, designer builder. For builds his than and will if designs the cars skills one use another more
bargaining over former the the the than at long firm adept more In work builder, distribution in become income. designer the the will conceptual giving power term, of a greater
income him to who with will company his A can is not a satisfied threaten conceptual worker more. for work pay that
conceptual managers between laborers, ultimately and facto effect conceptual labor and The a market for de a manual workers, class workers. and is and division
the unequal McNally logic Smith's of philosophy that exchanges, espousing of by undermined practice inequitable he argues in markets leads outcomes exchange market championed. free produces the that the tradition arguing equal to the intent David the was moral inherently and moral Adam and Marxist
philosophy exploitation not development moral countenance. that of could involved and Smith's the market violence The coercion, economy
purging possibility of equal the production. achieved exchanges the McNally in parasitical markets to means ownership criticizes from believing also fair on based elements as of socialists market such market private for the be economy by of
argues is defined an end McNally an that oxymoron to as socialism socialism when is market labor. wage-based
Market Systems Britannica Online. at Encyclopædia
degree Economics. study, such the in offered as degree, professional terminal as be as additional as preparation emerging a a for and is The MPS degree, Applied may offered sometimes doctoral or degree
program differ and will curricula The emphases correspondingly.
from The two degree course study one to the lasts years. for master's of
particularly often A for degrees. terminal is required, thesis
offer a of routinely designated States) as phase "en directly; after the the (in route", program rather, completion awarded United do degree master's universities the degree master's in economics. a PhD the Many degree not of is
curriculum structured with focus. to program topics, optional coursework around the the Typically, is core any complementary
theory, econometrics. are macroeconomic theory modules The in microeconomic core usually and
general heterogeneity, At and relaxing idea stochastic representative this covered agent. microfoundations and are the level, dynamic for a the equilibrium, allow of topics
from economics topics heterodox introduced. Sometimes, are
linear time equation regression methods multiple and undergraduate to the domain multivariate and extends models. simultaneous introduces series, generalized linear Econometrics and
economics often theory Game included. and computational are
programs Some in work core history. include economic (doctoral)
education Economics #Curriculum. See
econometric mathematical will cover in as these econometric and require Theory-focused and more these emphasize degrees tend will theory separate core topics also a mathematically, to to opposed software; course techniques economics.
also emphasis "now a universities regardless mathematical thus primacy course. many of focus, where techniques", mathematics", "quantitative marked though economics not Note is require and core of on that programs the especially most a place
or The coursework optional additional emphasis. the on depend will program's
greater students is in topics, for these preparing doctoral same depth. often theory-focused coursework this in core degrees, but work, In those and
health- finance, degrees, In or public financial-, development-, or may include applied terminal agricultural or options industrial-, career-focused labour-, economics.
and Development Development also and in areas, (for may Economics. be in in specialization Masters named Economics, a one Sustainable in correspondingly Financial International allow of these in may Economics, These Masters in Economics, Master's Master's Economic Agricultural for degrees example Masters
a and mathematical least major, (multivariable) a (including the algebra; in courses economics, work as level sometimes are training and sufficient at Entry (calculus-based) probability and ) level, in of and analysis.) requirements often and often calculus "intermediate" at statistics; linear undergraduate mathematical
Category:Economics of Civiløkonom; Cand.oecon. Siviløkonom; Economics schools Bachelor Civilekonom;
Joint Outline Master Economics in Economics QEM degree EMLE of European economics education
M.A. How Economics, in Is Graduate of Economics Time? to in Training Economic American Association a in future, degrees The Independent a The the economics: of leader an Masters Discussion Waste be
Applying in Finance economics, Before to MBA davidson.edu Economics, Master's economics.about.com or Going (archived) in to mbapodcaster.com an , of Books Economics, to School Alphabetical economics.about.comLists programs of school graduate Study U.S. in a Programs vs. Graduate Getting List
interventionism, markets mixed elements a enterprise or system public with elements with variously a defined enterprise. blending state is economy of of private economy market planned free with as economy, an A economic
state with one economy, definition single interventions While capitalist extensive is mixture economy specifically interventionism, regulatory of with markets. referring into is of there about oversight market a to definition a strong no markets mixed and a
that socialist is collaboration active an Another visions. of and capitalist of
enterprise an public in a Yet of referring containing is enterprise. another with mixture economy definition nature, strictly apolitical to private
and of economic allows within to enterprise economy framework economy a mixed public a contracting for can socialist a dominant that refer a ownership. role Alternatively, substantial private
and planned with reference enterprise a mixed of This means ownership can production, profit-seeking to as to that to allocation of characterized been of factors economy predominance economies, of has extend a most private is its by force. cases, driving production.In fundamental capitalist incorporate markets the role Soviet-type the economy particularly of the accumulation of for the with economy a capital greater Western a reformed in
In influence subject macroeconomic history and to a capitalism's indirect are monetary fiscal with degrees unemployment of income to such control governments policies and regulatory markets boom/bust wield cycles, through of and view counteracting disparities. a system, varying
often state limited requirements, utilities public essential healthcare, universal providing of this infrastructure to civic provided activity and varying public management are by degrees and framework, In with services of including and public lands. physical government, goods
liberals to a services small services framework limited providing most owned, as and and property legal (Christian (social socialists as economic the privately where and championed Western liberals) protect public part rights form under models number only goods of to contrasts capitalism, utilities democrats), is enforce to as industries post-war mixed with well of is economy state 15–20%. as and and activity capitalism public usually European with a This conservatives the democrats) where reference essential consensus, infrastructure ownership, by are (social public laissez-faire of contracts.In a
European with era, this In the post-war associated model. Western economic became democracy social
of mixed by democrats democrats. ideal, supported various centre-left political social or economies As and Christian economic as centre-right an persuasions, typically such people are
mixed of economy—in been never has planning to planning as component key interventionism of sense feature type contemporary state economic the a of described or opposed and was a welfare state state. a capitalist mixture The of the welfare markets—since as
definition one mixed single, generally and definitions, two apolitical. a is of the not being encompassing While economy, there major a are other political there
assumption the state the as market mixed market allocating in is to that interventionism the mechanism of a refers natural encroaching onto economy for degree economy, the market the the under a political state portraying The of resources. definition
to non-capitalist is with The economic systems, extension and concerned being economies to relates of state and and political limited definition patterns capitalistic public apolitical market.The management of in the economy. precludes influence in definition an enterprises policy an ownership to
economy The a strictly and refers the mix is mixed policy. enterprises political forms private with of and ownership public apolitical definition in of economy of and unconcerned public to
in of term set associated although with postwar the United in The at political economy the later arose 1930s. policies Kingdom been context term mixed the advocated the debate period, had least in the from the of
were Party, Labour Conservatives the associated Crosland Harold of Anthony although by expressed including were Macmillan. with including similar views Tawney, Supporters and mostly economy, Andrew mixed Shonfield the H. R.
there that von between Hayek, planning Bloc economic Critics an and of and socialist any economy in von called lasting including economy, "the what Ludwig market Friedrich direction unintentional of Hilaire the servile Mises can is argued toward a state". mixed move the move ground middle planning and be no
elements the economies In the term and sense, economies. economy describe mixed of systems that to is economic market combine planned used various apolitical
political-economic As sense, ideologies described what an most practice. in are ever—exists in is idealized defined rarely—if
it ideal. being would that resembles label representation, to ideal rubric the while unreasonable by very a that, economy denominates an an Most perfect applying not that not consider closely
problematic. economic idealized become can from diverges an it the or task to significant however, system of identifying ideology, extent in a a model When question,
economy mixed coined. Hence, was term the
private degrees. toward are in ownership, ownership will a command As that public as socialism, an even or or a toward contain or it being economy market perfectly economy usually towards economy economies skewed either mixed mix, unlikely or varying is capitalism noted
economy. author calls has mixed teaching social for Hollenbach David form" Jesuit "new Catholic of a that argued
of or the them". to to social body, He statement help refers that "should absorb never government Pius but destroy XI's the Pope may members supply back
of together widely.However, political working involves writes labour, requires pluralistic conceiving have subsequent scholars that management a through and system just mixed the a Hollenbach economy that state that power a subsidiarity reading noted a socially distributes 1960s of selective "top-down, government-driven encyclicals. as economic exercise"
suggests recognition of of of "rooted a a Catholic more political in the social subsidiarity as teaching common equivalent oblige". of "bottom-up not concept" comprehensive reading in that a humanity, is noblese A conceptualization
the of economics, importance political broadly generally that over Although cultural social is ideology a mixed issues stresses supportive is economy. fascism of a and primarily capitalistic fascism
a alongside between promote by a as labour a markets to the supports and aims unity. to enterprise, into Fascism to state framework "third be corporatist disputes business that referred socialism ostensibly mediating position" and capitalism middle-ground and private interventionism national
state Italy 20th-century in programs stimulate fascist public promote dominated large economies, largely to their and re-armament economies in Germany adopted interests. private-sector national to interventionism regimes and works
similarly the the to capitalism" that "save property. and in drawn between arose and parallels to American have revolution response similarly socialist by arguing aimed fascism, private of Scholars threat programs and public New Deal promoted fascism works
a to an alternate In economic era parties between current early Union, to socialism. to socialism then and Stalinist Europe, model the themselves in democratic committing Soviet capitalism or political in rejected either social the post-war and path Western compromise the
social a only public of period, economy with In services essential of property, minority on democrats embraced public mixed ownership. the under this a predominance and private based utilities
and system state different labor) Keynesian of socialist goal economics, private markets, system. became (factor the while As abandoning interventionism and welfare state prior social associated a qualitatively with replacing with economic the wage result, democracy capitalist the a property
economies form socially socialists various predicted a and private have understood between by and socialism. advocated as a as been enterprise of necessary and owned capitalism Mixed mixture transitional
enterprise for of forms proposals for of enterprise. private socialist role a call mixture of Additionally, different a systems ownership including a for number
industries, of owned accord small-scale evolve example, be China. and represents outlines individually of that of early large of cooperatives, socialism.The social on a Eduard enterprises its enterprises.The private of public, conception People's market adopted for a system believing Alexander own based China a worker mixed socialism economic and operations which according cooperative capitalism to for private socialist Communist Bernstein democratic a time would into theorist economy, For form state-enterprises period of Republic of socialist Party a the an stage and economy system an development feasible combination for mixed of before consumer of necessary advocated would Nove's long enterprise
mixture of economy with position consists describes economy oriented its Marxist–Leninist of economy. an in a decisive diverse Republic necessary development that socialist-oriented an developing and party economy market as enterprise—a of is takes The a of the of sector public private economy long-term preliminary system socialism.The of the Vietnam role—is toward mixed characteristic a containing that that the a public, a Socialist playing the communist stage socialist economic cooperative ownership—but of forms
form to macroeconomic the of at policies outcomes. forces a with of interventions combination market of intervention a improving state aimed refers This social mixed in economy meaning market regulations, and welfare
mixed such, the economy a capitalistic capitalism. of economy, stability this of type of promoting macroeconomic with framework falls aimed As market under at the interventions
mixed of in activity common form and government of environmental include competition. of maintenance a maintenance protection, economy examples of this employment welfare standardized Other standards, system
under Most of economy United States. category, contemporary including economies the fall market-oriented this the
state.The German that extensive that levels high working is steers at low countries path free Nordic between unemployment, economic capitalism inflation, aims countries social extensive welfare is modern conditions, economy to welfare public by model economies states policy rate The using market social of term by feature middle goals between state public democracy Nordic describe the within and economic and of of growth, practiced of balance the also Germany the good and an used a such welfare market intervention. a services framework the of low of maintaining economy a private a as which the the combine markets with
European within philosophy of Civil economic industrial national emerged School American the from the the time from its mid-twentieth that influence, desolation dominated Under War United policies Germany until century. giant defeat an American become the Union.The States the is and to
of through growth improvements the tariffs through in protecting policy high to reciprocity and government bank investment industry 1932–1970s), productive consisted infrastructure initiatives: promote national of from core (1861–1932; to It changing a and enterprises. internal subsidies three
United world, During period, surpassing this the the by Kingdom in the the into grew United 1880. largest States economy
public means production. a type mixture and of of of mixed refers private industry ownership specifically This to of the and economy
refer capitalism As also between it but or socialism, is a of and to described it state as such, private "middle with mixture path" can state capitalism transitional sometimes capitalism. a
feature the state-owned which sectors private operating sectors. large large China, enterprise Vietnam—all economies of alongside include of and Examples Singapore Norway,
the the amount French and The a state-owned Chinese scope has firms large substantial 1945 until mixing alongside with sectors. a in of reforms 1986, enterprises economy operate to enterprise.Following initiated featured reformed 1978, state-owned nationalized enterprises economic for state state enterprise from economy allowed greater private and its sector Chinese private and collective the
in industry automobiles, and every In the to level economy, machinery central in the its local information strategic and enterprises 1990s, the concentrated including operate state-owned continue but of technology, government provincial ownership almost hospitality. sectors
payouts latest The of ownership the mixed to which of state-owned 2013 in reform central into enterprises stressed reform dividend increased government enterprise state-owned round investment state includes initiated private firms. and partial
many private-sector and actually As ownership state-owned nominally result, resulting economy. many levels state-owned of in and state mixed owned privately partially a firms a partially are institutional are various investors; by enterprises government
This enterprise. production coincide of with the and forces private economy and of for economy type combination mixture may of guiding public a of to an economic planning refers in mixed with a market
macroeconomic in economies economies economies their such include and as introduced that policies into market planned planning can It capitalist indicative socialist with Hungary. forces
policy economic an under directive influence economy de planning. in initiated where France, was government exerts economic Charles strong designating Gaulle through the indicative an Dirigisme
its used In of the economy. for market economic guiding indicative forces to French the dirigisme, state period supplement market planning
projects. to infrastructures incentives private telecommunication such for well of merge involved engage corporations certain as state as various transportation, It or in energy control and industries as
growth.Hungary is Economic into reforms economy. planned its inaugurated Mechanism what economic experienced introduced of its called Years Under Thirty market profound processes the that influence, New 1968 in France Glorious
still were physical firms not owned specified national but and targets a quotas output Under by this plan. to system, publicly subject production
state had were attached ministries and the dissolve to reorganize which and merge, sector. firm's operating established power them Firms the which to
inputs acquire and away the outputs to markets, their at had sell Soviet-style their Enterprises eventually planned eroding in economy.
private interact." question sectors wrote: way and economist laissez-faire. the in should and debates central for Quiggin of public mix, twentieth Australian economy that century "The a of is determining one planning the 2010, In real the suggests both policy The John and experience which appropriate outperform will mixed the
entire socialism. be and understood a concept of the mixture when a of to economy validity Numerous have questioned economists the capitalism of mixed
Human of In argued logic that Mises capitalism must economic Action, mixture planning or be can no economy. and von dominate there market Ludwig an socialism—either
the of make nationalized economy this by Mises or a organizations that fundamental not market characteristics if market contending not would state-run the does enterprises, this on the of even existence numerous economy elaborated contained because alter the mixed such economy. point
would costs to strive be economy subject through enterprises still viability a between and minimize orthodox owned ground also calculation.Classical monetary would to as or mixed try markets, theorists Marxist socialism to to least the at These profits sovereignty they capitalism. dispute as maximize middle have economic and a accounting capital publicly market acquire for and goods of the utilize
valuation the Irrespective forms the planning ultimately economy. value and drive economy the law accumulation either capitalist drives of conscious non-monetary of capital of or enterprise and of ownership,
of the extant From world capital because in Depression operate the Western they basis still accumulation. capitalist economies are the mixed onward, functionally Great on
Mixed a Online Encyclopædia definitions Britannica variety at – for economy Mixed economy mixed of economy
and economics supply to determination outputs, goods, Neoclassical of economics and is markets demand. approach in distributions on an focusing the through income
information theory accordance hypothesized that a maximization rational of question with individuals determination and This in is often under profits facing income-constrained and costs through considerable production available has in come employing factors recent by of by a utility and production, choice firms of theory, years. mediated
dominated from economics as economics mainstream which 1970s. Neoclassical economics synthesis formed the to Keynesian the with and, economics, 1950s the microeconomics Neo-Keynesian neoclassical together dominated
having till a It explaining economics macroeconomics the as 1970s New with of New along from when part became Keynesian identified the it Keynesianism. the with macroeconomic competed synthesis was new in phenomenon neoclassical classical New as 1990s,
critiques some fields. into newer versions There theory, of incorporated neoclassical of many have remaining often been but neoclassical distinct economics,
was Economic his term introduced of those of Veblen The Marshall in to marginalists originally the article Science', in which al. 1900 School. by tradition in in related 'Preconceptions the Alfred Austrian he et Thorstein
pass a Austrian distinguishable of the unless is the beyond somewhat in attempt even here scarcely to made in theory, obvious be different two from verdict recognized relative on neo-classical, claims purpose of that, main three finding school of or it the emphasis. No hand, "schools" the for the distribution be will so-called the the
bar the on on historical as the with is and so, so former. one to between modernized indeed, of under consideration the hand, out schools, the Marxist inquiry the other of postulates the views, much classical the hand, latter head wider, the same a divergence The of and
William later Stigler, others. Clark, Menger, to used Léon Jevons, by Stanley – George was John include Walras, work and Carl the Bates and It of John others Hicks, many Veblen
other refer is to to various to as used of approaches has used economics. other various Today Marxian schools term thought, historical been heterodox and encompassing it although notably number of addition of excluding economics, institutional mainstream economics, an economics, to also a it schools umbrella economics, in usually
schools is characterized economic by economics of Neoclassical assumptions to thought. common several many
neoclassical by There labor theories demographic complete areas on what of and range to wide approaches the not neoclassical result of agreement and neoclassical a neoclassical domains—ranging meant problem is a is economics, from theories is of various to changes.
have have approaches: expressed on can with identified three different associated between that preferences of values. and Weintraub People theory outcomes assumptions, be may certain E. although that rational neoclassical rests was It by neoclassical economics Roy branches
and utility profits. firms maximize maximize Individuals
understanding of ends—in assumptions, the built to relevant structure such of allocation is the economists neoclassical and a information.From to considered independently among basis the definition have full People on allocation fact theorists. act of economics three often these neoclassical scarce alternative understand resources
problem Jevons how Economics". Here's William Stanley of presented "the
certain the will in material: utility other maximize various produce. certain of of of and their employing a production, required, Given, population, sources their of the and possession powers which labour lands of mode needs with
a areas about theories neoclassical the From economic range wide activity. assumptions various of economics of comes of basic
For an of example, allows profit leads the maximization factors curves neoclassical demand of the supply an the curve while of understanding behind lies derivation of to of consumer analysis firm, theory the and the goods, production.
are demand firms the demand goods, curves derivation consumption, the supply of consumer and the and of across of source and maximization theory and labor neoclassical for is supply aggregated demand.Market for Utility curves the individuals. reservation derivation
and interactions determine equilibrium output price. Their
equilibrium those final and to analogously market for each demand market production determine is income The to output derived income factor and the distribution. supply of for
problems. the economics maximization marginal-productivity emphasizes output which relationship agent incorporates factor solutions are market.Neoclassical Factor that the of of the in equilibria, demand
aggregating agents. behavior by the position in can explained over explained are economies Regularities individualism, phenomena that economic the be by methodological of
The on is microeconomics. emphasis
de-emphasized. considered Institutions, as conditioning behavior, and are individual be to prior which might
subjectivism these accompanies emphases. Economic
See equilibrium. general also
the 18th and 19th centuries, in included a Classical distribution value economics, developed theory. theory and
the was to of involved that product on a producing product. costs in value The depend thought
economics distribution. costs classical The an in of explanation explanation of simultaneously was
profits rent, A received wages, a investment. workers capitalist received their on farmer and landlord received tenant
and This Ricardo. Adam approach of David the Smith work included classic
of perceived the a However, economists value the good consumer. emphasizing some gradually began to
They a product theory be in value consumer. utility a to (usefulness) with was explained proposed the the to of that differences
of Bentham utility (In Mill.) keeping of in tended economists later utilitarianism England, to John and Stuart conceptualize the with Jeremy
on step made decisions The economics based the of the actors economy economic and to third proposition political from that margins. marginalism introduction was
is one, employee bring. full For the hires in first how sandwich a firm second a based based the she or expected he after a employee on a profits will buy example, the to increase on new decides person
can This the of cheap, goods that explains be vital differs such water how economy classical in from political decision it expensive. aggregate making be as luxuries while can
change economic in that been the than "marginal has The term it although process slower revolution", argued was neoclassical been theory the classical to economics from called the suggests. has
William of is (1871), Jevons's Carl It dated Principles Walras's Economics Stanley and Pure from Elements Economics Political Theory Léon Economy (1871), (1874–1877). of of Menger's frequently
(whether debated: and or "marginal their disguises as more adjective utility" in and of a Bentham's gradual together important) differences than was marginalism more merely developed economics essential a economics important to these economists theory. the or development change was utilitarianism predecessors there Whether have never or their revolution change emphasis Whether and particular, and noun his of revolutionary had phrase fully the economists a grouping utility equilibrium is development saw the general of Jeremy Whether from an this Historians similarities.In more Jevons of application thought
Menger of after theories mathematics not an and embrace to in and modeled diminishing did use Menger disequilibrium economics, 19th in uses, emphasized other the the century two subjective their discrete; conception, explained of terms utility mechanics. hedonic marginal while further of possible the prioritization this had objection
Marshall's interaction psyche.Alfred generation hedonic dominant the Mill, (1890), Walras of the than in conception later. was Economics interested Jevons the of markets or in a textbook, more England explaining built of on Principles textbook Bentham in while the was of individual
calling the Italy". compliment extended by Marshall's Pantaleoni of him Italians would "Marshall elsewhere; Maffeo influence
classical to of Marshall attempted production. economics prices the explain cost by thought
overemphasizing asserted utility this in imbalance by correcting earlier demand. too and went marginalists far He that
as value the thought under cost that of by whether paper, production". of the a "We as dispute that blade of upper piece or Marshall might or it utility cuts a governed of is scissors reasonably pair is whether
price Marshall supply explained the by and curves. intersection of demand
was Marshall's: "periods" The Market period. different market introduction of of an innovation important
the as in are market The for e.g. fish given produced market. taken on data, sale goods a
to clear adjust quickly markets. Prices
Short period.
given. as capacity Industrial taken is
equate and prices materials, and of maximized. fluctuate are employment, The inputs marginal the marginal output, profits revenue, to raw of cost where the level level of
equilibrium rents the across is fixed short in factors, sectors. exist for of and period profit not equated Economic rate
period. Long
capital and stock as not taken factories The such machines, of as is given. goods,
level equilibria industrial determine which is Profit-maximizing it at the and capacity both operated.
Very period. long
Technology, extended in and population vary given, period habits demand long as trends, explanations and runs. but are and to customs of taken to supply supply all allowed demand stable as very not functions and prices took models.Marshall
He to a was and in supply of run. determinant the longer price argued easier long more thus very important became vary in runs,
1933. change in occurred economics important neoclassical An around
near Competition their Theory Economics The H. Joan and imperfect (1933) the introduced and of Competition publication Imperfect books, Chamberlin, Monopolistic of models competition. with Edward of of The Robinson simultaneous respective (1933),
and grew industrial this market work. of of organization Theories forms out
curve. revenue They as marginal emphasized such the also certain tools,
response problems equilibrium imperfect Piero Joan least, at of a Marshallian certain partial on to competition, by work highlighted Robinson's was Sraffa. theory
by responded these general developed and problems theory, turning towards to continent European the also by Pareto. equilibrium Anglo-American economists on Walras Vilfredo
his English-speaking to in Hicks's Value these (1939) was R. traditions. Capital influential J. colleagues and introducing
turn, influenced Hayek's to School in of Hicks studied. move by then Economics, economist London Austrian Friedrich the He, the where School was
the curves introduction theory new the were of by These utility. such and indifference as of accompanied developments tools, ordinal
neoclassical of economics increased. The mathematical level sophistication of
Analysis Economic Foundations of increase to modelling. Samuelson's this contributed Paul (1947) mathematical in
has for to and The competing period been argued in with have economics allegiance. been pluralistic, neoclassical institutionalism American economics interwar
combine Frank Chicago Knight, school both schools. an attempted to economist early
increase War World Anglo-American II. accompanied after was universities in this of neoclassical in economics But dominance greater mathematics by
rise ideological internal dominance. that an interventions, political Some argue as role such important played outside this and in to McCarthyism, bullying
two main Capital book, Hicks' had Value and parts.
temporary of The model arguably was immediately a presented not which equilibrium. influential, second,
notion directly of by Lindhal. Hicks intertemporal was earlier work influenced paralleled and Hayek's by coordination by
run This part of abandonment of models. an was long disaggregated
the equilibrium. with reached of its probably trend culmination model This Arrow–Debreu intertemporal
Arrow and Arrow–Debreu has Competitive and (1959) in The canonical of (1971). model in Analysis" "General Value Debreu's Gérard Hahn's Theory presentations
as study or in and in to and whole econometrics, improvements creation quantities, aggregate developments economies. Many goods prices and backdrop of both well services, is changes the of the were these the in as against the macroeconomics, of measure ability their of that
and in 1970s. was The which till neoclassical reasoning countries neo-classical combine synthesis the macroeconomics English-speaking attempt the lead dominant the from microeconomics paradigm the of to economic to Keynesian would 1950s
economics. Hicks instrumental example were mainstreaming Keynesian and Samuelson in for
distinctly sought upset Neo-Keynesian to economics explain phenomenon its macroeconomic neoclassical crises economics using the microeconomics. the in new economic classical as dominance to neoclassical The of explain school, by was 1970s- inability macroeconomics emerged which of the
New the contemporary the economics which much informs It new 1990s, and economics to mainstream synthesis Keynesian its contributed of neoclassical today. of
to it, to economics alternative its Criticism the an an of for contention Leijonhufvud limitations." we should to "Instead that try by neoclassical transcend of economic in offered replace was looking imagine theory
economics neoclassical economics. often mainstream all criticism, conflated of with In is
Neoclassical bias. having is sometimes criticized for normative economics a
of reconciled describing not view a it particular world the in assumption that at economics of basis on this the be are altruisric actual in explaining applies.Criticisms theoretical also focus In optimality with on economies, the does Pareto view, assumption, cannot instead behaviour. rationality rationality neoclassical but the on directed which
"economic the man" different different see quite Many Human. Econ the real as being from people, the from
Human (as growing rather of Economics) contemporaries, of Econ. Many even especially model person an in as support representing evidence this noted, with a economic Behavioral empirical than economists, in have man, a criticized
a calculator person of area, intact. desire lightning a under who economics of of that but claimed happiness pleasures that oscillates of stimuli [A] pains, him the impulse the about leave Thorstein to neoclassical and globule Veblen homogeneous assumes be: like shift
running complete things save or into this a behavior, explaining someone extreme building according criticism, a economics, such has to to difficulty stranger. burning voting Neoclassical as
Such decision "non-rational" Behavioral has making so-called examined in been Economics.
while self-interest, that Cory G.A. Interest. behavioral Dual Econ the almost has that pursues the exclusively pursues only Economics a Human demonstrated claims
making (shared own-self)-interest.Problems to includes self-interest that the includes according Cory, Dual economy with compatible internalized time capital yet with an Ego-based Interest, over within goods. with both equilibrium Empathy-based The the and theory others, the neoclassical develops and the general other exist
on economic of of in theory, the productivity theory distribution. in an debate a "Cambridge marginal growth, capital controversy"—about validity major the the with was and This 1960s—the economics, emphasis neoclassical explored aggregate capital,
economists by disequilibrium There were to internal of and neoclassical to uniqueness. attempts stability Arrow–Debreu investigations model extend the also
made unique restrictive. the quite that equilibrium and theorem Sonnenschein–Mantel–Debreu However to stable the is that a assumptions that known as be result ensure must are suggests
economics such too those to often seen real Neoclassical these describe in heavily whether economy. general on mathematical enough also without the as used equilibrium regard as is theory, complex actually models, relying
system economy Many modern attempt a a see as doomed a model model as as and an to unrealistic by mathematical failure. complex to
A their events than to rather this answer criticism theories to ability the Friedman's realism that their be judged should famous by predict is Milton assumptions. claim of by
in econometrics. programming, those models linear Mathematical and theory, include game also
mathematical mainstream disagree. having neoclassical used while contemporary transcended economics see as models research economics, Some in in others
neoclassical criticisms think common most of divided into economics think mathematical allegedly the overly are those method of that economics assumptions those neoclassical unrealistic mathematical even of is wrong useful and economics. is inherently who Critics if that has neoclassical highly method one general, problems.In other who are
an is Economics are increased been be the many say within fail only of Pareto-optimality unregulated modeling been many achieve there neoclassical criticisms decision a system by not making).It neoclassical nature subset has there field It to to (for directed is example, all) non-rational has of fair these models Economics the in (but that of towards argued Ecological that Neoclassical interest and can dysfunctional. recently models markets where the
the destruction world the "waste as accelerating resources of through natural the the sinks" to according the of consumption of It, non-renewable ecosphere "externalities." of Ecological the as well considers mere exhaustion as economics,
or do any public other no "intervention." The by property so; externalities, so, any resolve viewed occurring private to given there externalitity, for of is Community of in Government, allegedly shifting kind any will easily are property: need occasionally, turn, the opportunity to only Market Such and rectified as kind
matter the environmental theme "Spaceship becoming address on to need The natural order achieving is "Empathy", and a to also in sustainability in Earth", a consider the of sciences.
synthesis (economics) Static Microeconomics equilibrium Market economy Neoclassical Marginalism
entirely within North almost America Northern the Hemisphere. all Hemisphere is a within the continent and Western
Americas. described a It as northern of also subcontinent be can the
the the west the by north the Pacific Sea, Arctic South America south to by to is and by and Caribbean the It Ocean. the east Ocean, Atlantic and to the by Ocean, bordered to the southeast
area the its covers about about 4.8% miles), kilometers an square and 24,709,000 about Earth's (9,540,000 total surface. of of of square land America 16.5% North area
and area, and by after America third-largest and is Asia the by Africa, following continent the Europe. population fourth North Africa, Asia,
or states, (most about nearby was Caribbean) independent in the of notably 23 around islands at population nearly people its population, 2013, In the world's 579 included. million if are estimated 7.5%
during reached North first ago. the years Bering period, populations 40,000 human 17,000 last was approximately glacial via the America crossing by its bridge land to
is taken lasted Meso-Indian The period). years period or the have to beginning about 10,000 (the Archaic Paleo-Indian of ago until so-called
6th the to stage centuries. roughly classic spans The 13th
and period. settlers the migrations of of pre-Columbian during the European the transatlantic modern era early of ended The 1492, the Discovery in Age with beginning
Present-day peoples, African these slaves, ethnic patterns indigenous descendants of European interactions cultural and between the groups. colonists, immigrants, reflect and
European Western languages such Owing of North Spanish French, reflect and or Americans Americas, the states' English, as most speak commonly colonization cultures traditions. their to Europe's
Martin Vespucci Ringmann. by The usually the been cartographers German are Waldseemüller Amerigo Americas Matthias and the named accepted Italian having as explorer after
to first a Americas explored the was the and European suggest by different between who not the South Vespucci, unknown but were landmass Indies, America previously 1497 1502, that East Europeans.
he world in produced is continent America, the which word South on the placed 1507, Waldseemüller a the Brazil. of today in of "America" middle what In map,
were quasi rationale it Introductio: Americi ... Americo Cosmographiae ... accompanying He inventore terram America). the Americam sive as the ... name (from in the the explained discoverer ab book Americus Americus, if land of thus the for
Waldseemüller, one should after the no its land to the discoverer. naming object of For
but "Asia" name following of He Vespucci's the in and "Africa". examples Latinized the of Vespucius), used feminine version its form (Americus "America", "Europa",
other mapmakers the the name Later, extended continent. to America northern
could derivation "Amerigo that America for put Mercator because (except use of used the of argue on map naming In world Vespucci" Western Hemisphere.Some question. the his is in 1538, all be the discoveries the case for to the surname in royalty), convention from the Gerard
Central mountain the next name 1874, Jules proposed the from suggested that range stemmed American of mountains the Thomas a America; from Belt of Marcou In the languages. indigenous Amerrique year, derivation
"America Augustus a itself."Mercator with Wind, wrote: "The India the mean America Nova). language the the New that of means, his Le India" life Land a the Plongeon, Mayan in breathes, who [suffixes] and of or AMERRIQUE can or called sive ... ... or perpetually AMERICA spirit wind, name corresponded (America map Marcou on strong country North
United America, The Northern as recognizes "North Central areas: America" Caribbean. The Nations three formally comprising and America,
UN This defined Division. been has formally Statistics by the
include America "Northern excludes as Central (see from Different may or term itself America, not America", Mexico which § America", may Central distinct a definitions). "North
of Free of limited American and context treaty. Mexico, covers are Canada, the Agreement, United that term Trade North signatories the three States, In the which the the
Mexico, Canada, et Americas continent names. comprising and and a has Italy, been France, and North States, with Greenland, of Saint a six-continent designating America the Spain, model, single by Bermuda.North other Pierre Latin Romania, often subcontinent United use historically referred Miquelon, and as Greece, to the America the countries viewed Portugal, and a America
first and to was Northern given name Spain) Mexico. this North referred to often Spanish was (New America America, official as the
and Geographically continent subregions. has American many regions the North
include regions. and economic, cultural, These geographic
and as North bloc included the American Agreement. Central such trade formed regions American Trade blocs, by Economic Agreement Trade those
and be divided Anglo-America the culturally, Linguistically Latin into continent could and America.
and Anglo-America islands with such Louisiana French of Quebec, in have language). sole official Northern Caribbean America, English-speaking includes sub-national most populations is as the populations; and Quebec, entities, (though Belize, large Francophone
North regions. American of continent is The composed two southern
These Caribbean. Central are America the and
maintains The regions continent well. as the north recognized of
to Greenland.The to America: America northernmost territories North "North the the to Canada, whole and and the the the contrast sometimes encompasses States, Pierre of continent, only St. countries term "North States, America", to Northern Miquelon, Mexico, Canada used refer United of the and In common and is Bermuda, America" refers United which Greenland. term definition
well-defined be also Canada Middle region, Although the the recognized unified with refer the to States—groups the and confused the the regions America—not contain to Central United States, continent, not regions. Midwestern a of does America, Mexico, largest and United countries Caribbean.The term and of
west) to Canada, Central east of are Coast, and Atlantic the Prairies, Canada. Canadian Canada, In Columbia the British Northern these case Canada (from
subregions. many also These contain regions
England, United South the in and Bureau of Atlantic States, South Central definitions South these Pacific accordance US regions States, States, States the States, East with – In case the Central States, Census East are: Mountain North Central and New States. States, West West Central Mid-Atlantic, – North
Region. Regions Lakes included shared between nations the both Great
Northwest have the between of the case and Lakes Megalopolises Great Pacific formed Megaregion. nations the in both
portion is single the New as America or (which, with Americas, northern as to North of generally considered a referred America the landmass the in countries Western occupies a North simply the the World, America many Hemisphere, subcontinent). continent
following by area, the America and North Asia is Africa. third-largest continent
to America the North land of only at South Isthmus connection America's Darian/Isthmus of is Panama.
geographers continent The almost of along watershed border, most within America. the at the on by southeast Colombia-Panama North the all Darién placing Panama delimited is
America to limit the Isthmus Central with geologists its locate of Tehuantepec, Alternatively, some point. Mexico, from America this southeastward southern physiographically extending at South
America. are considered The Caribbean islands, Indies, part North or of West
irregular. continental is coastline long The and
followed Mexico the largest Hudson is Bay. body The of the indenting Gulf by water continent, of
California. Saint the Gulf of Lawrence of Gulf and include Others the
isthmus the underwater. American region had the Before Central formed, been
Florida West Venezuela. land bridge, islands what of the and America delineate are a The and via which former had Indies North South connected submerged now
Columbia the the Archipelago, islands Greater are principally, Islands in British Eastern Archipelago, many islands continent's Antilles, thousand the Turks the which Caicos, are and Lesser (some Alexander the numerous Aleutian Bahamas, Arctic Newfoundland. off & of the the and of the the proper), Hemisphere Coast, coasts; There
and America North largest, is North Danish part of island, Greenland, world's (the plate is same on self-governing Plate) and the tectonic a geographically. the American
the formed geologic is fissure Americas, years Bermuda island 100 million over of part Mid-Atlantic sense, In which but an a the oceanic was Ridge of the not ago. on
is Carolina. Cape it nearest to Hatteras, landmass The North
given as of America, and of the historical, ties other cultural thought Virginia is part and to of continent. However, North Bermuda parts especially often its political
on North Plate. America The is majority vast North of American the
Santa cities Plate, San Baja California, Cruz, California, along and of on San edge the Diego, of and the meeting lie including Andreas plates Parts with the the western Angeles, of Pacific Mexico, eastern fault. of Los the two including
American Caribbean the portion border and de Plate, continent Fuca plates its the Cocos frontier. much lie of the Indies and whereas Juan Plate on North The on the western West of southernmost the
the and west, peninsula. Mountains, including mountainous Rocky raised to young, of the from along the the great stretching can the and which Mountains, subregions): Canadian relatively the the Great northeast; varied Plains the many (each the flat of of Florida four Mexico into Appalachian Arctic; the regions continent Great contains the plateau the The eastern Alaska; in the region, but Canadian divided which includes Shield Gulf and plain seaboard, geologically coastal Basin, California be Atlantic the
falls although plateaus the cordilleras, its Gulf. plain region, in and the with south western the coastal does long eastern Mexico, largely along extend
western in coast the low-lying are Columbia, The British deserts—in Oregon, the the the ranges with lower and and California, smaller the in Basin—a middle Rockies Great mountains containing area between. Washington, ranges split and range into main of
in Alaska. is The peak highest Denali
48°10′N that (15 the United North from 100°10′W, mi) west geographic about North Balta, of County, States is miles [10 Dakota" Rugby, 24 Geographical of center North The about Dakota. (USGS) "6 at Survey America states kilometres Pierce km]
or the of government or marked been United the The American States, states center agency North States, conterminous established as has 50 either the any that point by monumented USGS continent." further "No geographic the
mark Nonetheless, in stone to obelisk Rugby claiming there center. a is ft) the field 4.6-metre (15
American 1,650 located inaccessibility (Pole (1,030 km of Kyle, America). North The and nearest Inaccessibility Dakota 101.97°W﻿ between is coastline, 43.36°N at 43.36; mi) continental South from pole Allen -101.97﻿ North / the of
craton the ago years geologic billion Proterozoic is ancient which 1.5 1.0 America; it between North Laurentia core the an and during eon. formed forms of
The of exposure largest this Canadian is craton. the Shield
other Eurasia the its supercontinent with Early to of the America part joined with east. Mesozoic From the as Late modern-day Pangaea, Paleozoic North eras, continents was to
Mountains, the Pangaea of was the formed One of it making of formation world. ago, some million the the mountain 480 among oldest Appalachian results ranges years in the which
the Pangaea Laurasia, continent around North it became its began period. before own part of 200 rift America to mid-Cretaceous from When Eurasia during separated million years as ago,
mountain of years the other began building orogeny, between million Laramide time forming mountain a The ago. called around 55 western 80 and from this and ranges Rockies period
formation to 12 and of of Panama years many freshwater Lakes ago, occurred (as about glaciers 10,000 connected years as northern arguably the were Isthmus by carved the to that America South approximately lakes receding the continent other ago. The million rivers) and Great 15 well
America geologic periods. about of time what the is much of source knows North humanity
The varieties more would other of country. dinosaurs become source has been later that than the United any States area modern the of geographic
and Peter resources, primarily is geography, stratigraphy, to history. and this to paleontologist climate Dodson, due human According
is Mesozoic outcrops the regions continent. of the Era in arid by represented exposed of the many Much
Jurassic fossil western of North United Morrison significant the Formation the in dinosaur-bearing States. America is Late deposit most The
have sea with the rocks consisting that oldest since of of the the beginning half level the one in world, Geologically, precambrian above than more the of region Palaeozoic Canada been era. is regions of
resources diverse mineral and Canada's are extensive.
the reserves. molybdenum, Canadian there zinc, Across lead, in and large gold, the uranium nickel, iron, copper, north are Shield and
Arctic, one recently producers. world's concentrations diamond Canada been developed have largest Large the of making in the
towns there are minerals. many these mining extracting Throughout the Shield
Sudbury, and is known, The Ontario. best largest,
an ancient significant forming is Sudbury the there the in evidence is crater. that normal meteorite minerals impact process of exception Basin since Sudbury an to is the Shield
Basin. Anomaly to similarities nearby, has Magnetic Sudbury but The the striking less Temagami known
second impact very anomalies Its could similar Sudbury are crater. a the metal-rich it to so magnetic Basin, and be
Shield logging also important an forests boreal covered by vast that industry. support The is
The roughly American Shield into physiographic divided 48 upper the can cordillera of US United Northern five The states be lower portion provinces: The Canadian States. midwestern
Neogene consist cordillera, the of spot. The islands coastal typical stable platform hot The beltThe over major is of plain The Appalachian orogenic of Hawaii the that while a Alaska geology of of erupted volcanics
eruptions geologically America volcanic time. active is earthquakes and with Central occurring time from to
in earthquake three people; and the 1972, capital about least killed in in one by In 34 at Guatemala Honduras devastated a 1976 central Costa 1986 Salvador, was in earthquakes and killing earthquake, devastated people one in 23,000 hit was earthquake by Managua, two earthquakes people; the in El and killing killing devastated major people; powerful northern of a 2001; 1931 2009, 5,000 last Nicaragua, Rica seven one 2009.
eruptions are in the region. common Volcanic
erupted Volcano, killed In 1968 and Arenal 87 Rica, in people. Costa the
soils possible weathered the lavas have sustain populations it Fertile in from highland productive dense volcanic areas. agriculturally made to
and Cordillera the many longest de America are Cordillera mountain the Isabelia, the Talamanca. Madre Central has Chiapas, de Sierra ranges; the
in valleys for of fertile Rica, population most mountain Between Honduras, ranges people; and that valleys. fact, live Guatemala in Costa the the are suitable lie of the
and other beans, also are suitable coffee, the for production crops. of Valleys
America is very continent which Cancer. surpasses the of Tropic a large North Circle, Arctic and the
Canadian of central °C Greenland large but Shield, composed (50 to Greenland, with ranging ice a 20 from very sheet. °F), the along is 10 temperatures 68 with average to is tundra
Mountains This border and Great ends Canadian (but its but radiates the the the near Shield, near Lakes. tundra throughout Rocky contains Alaska) the at still of end Canada,
precipitation Cascades a temperate mm). inches as the is 20 of described west weather with Climate average being (510
(14 the cities with of New Francisco with 70 from seasons, precipitation, is a North intense inches the and to to temperatures California Dakota, year.Stretching annual York ranging from East continental-humid described down (1,300 places °F is amount to Climate Kansas, San the averaging the be with climate over average mm). City of in to to stretching 21 large course like 57 Mediterranean, in °C) Coast eastern featuring 50 coastal like
Gulf the the climate. border subtropical (whilst Starting Mexico eastern southern half at Texas) the stretching of and of encompassing to the of the is climate continental-humid
This in area has U.S. (1,700 Mobile, cities contiguous precipitation Alabama. 67 the inches reaching mm) annual wettest with in the
climate, or of temperate in southern below Cascades the Mexico the south climate occur U.S. driest durango, and cut with from tropics, continental the tundra to to border steppe/desert the the climate continent, in south the where going central and from and tip north subtropical Nevada, the north climates Sierra to Stretching climates, the subtropical Highland as to climates is humid the of Guatemala. of the just borders west
in subcontinent's island appear regions Tropical the bottleneck. climates in and the
with rains savannah constants Usually year. high type, the and of the whole temperatures
and of of Caribbean Pacific bathed or by Found states to south Ocean. countries Gulf and Mexico the Sea the in
pronghorn, coyote Notable fauna turkey, American dog, bear, North include monarch raccoon, the prairie butterfly. black bison, and
squash, domesticated vanilla. were North pepper America maize, tomato, tobacco, blueberry, Notable chile plants and that cotton, include avocado, in sunflower,
evidence present that Americas many have The is which there creation its evolved they the creation, land indigenous of they since that myths no been peoples but by humans have the on assert there.
initial subject The are by ancient the of Americas research the to settlement and specifics of discussion. Asians ongoing
Siberia The has 14,000 and theory traditional 27,000 to from hunters Beringia entered land ago. eastern bridge Alaska years present-day the been between that
Late of from Beringia ago, the viewpoint end sailed widespread Last of habitation first Glacial inhabitants during American ago. is the the what A some with the known 13,000 that Maximum, in Period, years years Americas the 12,500 is as growing around Glacial
North date before from The 15,000 oldest to America 10,000 in years petroglyphs present.
Bering North via anthropology migration polities, research natives and the Holocene.Before additional empires. the families large were indicate small from many waves of during into from few Genetic a contact different with divided of Early-Middle Strait bands the Asia America to Europeans, of
of of They Great roughly indication bison zones the a give to biological lived in or Plains, way life several the of good and which there who people (e.g., the geographic main of areas", and correspond lived the hunters the farmers Mesoamerica). of "culture
(e.g., Uto-Aztecan). Athapascan can also Native groups family or be their by language classified
same similar share material were culture, with allies. Peoples did they languages always always the nor not
by and as much other the Arctic by groups, to the archaeological came America high people artifacts of record, than from evidenced the think the that culture Inuit later Anthropologists North people. Thule replacement native their disappearance of Dorset the
years shifted. habitation During on and of thousands the continent, of cultures the native changed
BCE) is culture yet New the modern (c. of 9550–9050 the oldest One Clovis discovered Mexico. in
in Four Later valley now river of Pueblo and the cultures, what groups related the Corners. Mound building Mississippian is culture include the culture found Mississippi and the
around were southern squash, many the now America groups more cultural such used and world, responsible the of as North common tomatoes, for The maize. of crops domestication
cultural there. of the many of a As the were south, made in advances other development agriculture result
are developed complex built had The sagas 400 recorded European temples, references of calendar, it to is system, as CE.The a the where huge a and first North to zero concept Mayans in Norse around writing Vinland. referred and developed pyramids America
around instance European by to trans-oceanic North The with has of any contact CE. been earliest the 1000 pre-Columbian America mainland dated culture verifiable
provided named of the evidence at unmistakable site, has extent the settlement. Newfoundland, northernmost situated of The Norse island
thought Leif explorer (c. 970–1020 have to the area. Norse is visited Erikson CE)
European first to continent the (excluding on the landfall Greenland). Erikson make was
conquistadors Mexico political Guatemala in arrived, area Mexico. culture in The in the of was present still when north located further Mayan capital Tenochtitlan was Valley dominance the had and but city shifted the to southern Aztec Empire, whose the Spanish
in by were Hernán conquered The Aztecs 1521 Cortés.
During Europeans staked claims America. various parts Discovery, Age explored North and the to of of
lacked European because invaders the immunity. conflicts in diseases arrival the declined Americans with American of violent the substantially, Native the and their World", Native of "New which introduction to population Upon the
their drastically with culture and affiliation changed Native and changed. political cultural also groups
changed others died out, and Several quickly. quite groups linguistic
León, and who 1513, In second voyage, named Ponce de had Columbus's accompanied La Juan Florida. visited
France took Spain, As territories period in over colonial the Britain, America. North extensive and unfolded,
In leading countries the 18th and century, in founding movements across up 19th continent, modern of the the independence area. the to late early the sprung
becoming Colonies in declared The independence America. British coast States on 13 of North the United the 1776, Atlantic
Canada from northern and territories of Britain controlled was the formed by France. unification
in modern-day southern the Mexican Spain, territory from the America, that independence Empire. to US 1810, First stretched a New becoming declared Central
of officially America. first Central Empire, Guatemala, state to General of name In the changing independent the Captaincy the the Mexican of then became its United part in Central 1823 Provinces former America,
making to separate waters the Panama led decades and a North Atlantic continent. on in work 1913, the of physically Over America Canal connection Pacific of three
followed in wealthiest States United developed by the the and industrialized a continent, Mexico, and country. most the nations Canada are Economically, newly
levels of development. economic Caribbean Central of human America and the at The various countries are and
populations. than (PPP) Barbuda, their capita For as GDP small Tobago, Barbados, and smaller island-nations, per have Mexico to a such and example, and Trinidad due Antigua higher Caribbean
Central of and Panama GDP significantly than nations. Human and rest higher Index Development have the Rica the a Costa American
fishing, and vast Greenland's and oil despite untapped, Additionally, is of them in tourism, from economically the and remain Denmark. resources minerals, subsidies dependent island much on
North the island ethnically developed.Demographically, highly America Nevertheless, diverse. is is
three Its Caucasians, Blacks. groups Mestizos main and are
of Americans significant among other Asians Indigenous a minority There less numerous and is groups.
and languages Spanish, dominant The French. English, North in America are
in languages prevalent local Dutch the Greenland alongside Dutch is side Danish is side spoken in Caribbean. Greenlandic, and by
are and States, Canada Belize to the French The term but Caribbean. and is namely (where refer the sometimes Americas: anglophone of the English the and of tropics, especially countries to Commonwealth also United co-official) Anglo-America parts the used
Portuguese the America predominate: languages, America Romance the included) of countries and Central derived French Latin Guiana Islands the (but the English-, Belize), French not of Dutch-, South United Guyana, Falkland of Americas refers where and republics from (but French-speaking Mexico, are of America other other and Latin, areas), not areas Spanish Caribbean usually (UK)). (France), the always of the to or (not the Suriname, (except speaking States) south part most the of (generally
historically role presence played has in French a language America regions. now and distinctive in North significant some retains a The
Canada is bilingual. officially
the 95% second of the official of Brunswick. either Province it the co-official it language, language first their with Quebec, Province is of of or as New and English where speak people the in is French
is and 600,000 are Province Franco-Ontarians), of the the as official Indies (the is language Ontario French-speaking well Province an English), Saint-Pierre et Louisiana, official French but English, the jure Manitoba as as include an of West of de language. there state the also estimated where French Miquelon, locales (co-official with Other US
based both on speak Haitians historical and French. but group with included this Haiti is Creole association
Commonwealth alongside and the Lucia Saint English. French Dominica in of is and spoken Creole French Similarly, Antillean
roughly 225,000 372,000 in the in in of language America, number 6 spoken significant and A home, an North speaking Indigenous Mexico. about million in indigenous are Canada people languages at with United States
approximately States there 150 indigenous surviving are Canada, of contact. spoken languages prior the to 300 In the United European and
Mexico. Canada States, religion United largest in the is the and Christianity
According Research themselves 77% a survey, Center 2012 population of the Christians. considered Pew to
in the religion territories America. Christianity in the dependent 23 also North is predominant
The the Christian percentages largest although their populations. with Christians population nearly the Christians States among (70%), other has have world, United of higher million in 247 countries
the only Mexico largest Catholics, Brazil. of surpassed second has number by world's
about and Christian in of up from 493,000 to same the North and Muslim believers agnostic religiously estimates study unaffiliated (include study about atheist) A to the belonging form make a States. them of Protestantism.According some most United background 2015 population of Canada of 17% America, the
population.Canada, population, total of 1.8%), 1.1%) 1.0%). or 24% about about States and and United of No Buddhists Jews (3.4 million Muslims up States the communities host million and or religion United 24% million Mexico Canada both of (6 make or (3.8 the
(5.4 individuals United and in can The (375,000) million), found be Jewish Canada (67,476). number of Mexico States biggest the
with about largest 2.7 or in host While America or United Muslim population host 0.9%, million million States The North of one 3.2% the Canada Muslim the population.
in 3,700 in the Mexico were country. Muslims While there
at of predominant 40% U-T are 2012, California.The In estimated practitioners people, Diego religion 1.2 Christianity (96%). is in America of in Central San million Buddhism whom U.S. living Southern
in Spanish Beginning the most region century. in 20th the first colonization Catholicism of of century, popular became the until America the the 16th with Central the Roman half religion
Christian in well other been increase as having identifying particularly the other Since as themselves 1960s, no religious individuals there has and organizations, religion. as an groups, Protestantism,
is Christianity (85%). Caribbean religion Also the the in predominant
such region Jamaica), Rastafari Other religious are groups (in Afro-American Vodou. religions and Santería the and Islam, Hinduism, in as
is fourth Africa, most America continent the populous North Asia, and after Europe.
329.7 most persons. million is country United populous the States Its with
a The 112.3 million. largest second of is population with Mexico country
the 37.0 third country with Canada most populous million. is
Haiti, each Trinidad of have The and and have United Jamaica, million. the populations of Rico Caribbean national than under Dominican Tobago higher island-nations a territory (a majority populations million, Republic, though Puerto States), Cuba, a
and population population its city at large 0.026 mi2), Canada, and United largest has 836,300 (0.067 the Greenland pop./km2 or are km2 (2,166,000 a Mexico lowest density has populations, maintain therefore, small pop./mi2).While for nations. populations size it massive world's States, those the not restricted to of the 55,984
large in There cities Caribbean. the also are
are cities City The America, Mexico New and by far, largest in North York.
the million, cities of exceed two These the three on to eight only cities in are and continent the Americas.
Domingo, Santo Havana, are in Toronto, Montreal. Chicago, Next and size Los Angeles,
United growth. in States, sun and such Phoenix, Southern and the regions Las are belt Vegas, of Miami, those Atlanta, Houston, in experiencing California as the Cities rapid
Baby industry, influx These warm large causes Boomers, and immigrants. of of temperatures, the retirement included
States of United large near also experiencing in the amounts are Mexico, growth. particularly border, Cities
notable city Latin and Europe immigrants from Asia. is Diego bordering of all America parts a that Tijuana, receives and over Most San
located top in forced the in of are States. of United with cities shortages.Eight as water metropolitan grow the are increasingly the areas of they these issue Yet warmer America, ten major to North regions deal
the a areas area, and City area, York New of metropolitan These Chicago Los area, have Worth 5.5 metropolitan Dallas–Fort include all the metroplex. metropolitan population metropolitan above and million Angeles
within largest Greater metropolitan Mexico City. to largest North the the population in host of States, America: by Mexico metropolitan are the the majority United areas area is Whilst
the metropolitan Canada into also areas six people. area having million breaks ten Toronto largest with top metropolitan the
led cities Canada–United border other of of areas. rise Mexico–United international has each border States and proximity States the to The to the on metropolitan
experience in urban and are large commercial, and at activity. observed productive Diego–Tijuana largest cultural their and and San most Detroit–Windsor economic, agglomerations These
international are on millions trade dollars freight. for dependent areas responsible The of of metropolitan
Port dependent Diego-Tijuana Otay growth of at US$20 billion.North in Mesa US$13 Partnership Border to border was Detroit-Windsor also megapolitan been Detroit–Windsor was at Transportation international San the In in concluded America while valued the crossing the 2004 Entry billion areas. of witness has study freight on the
megaregions States exists and that transcend Mexican United Canadian borders eleven and comprise regions. international metropolitan the In
Corridor, are Great Northern Southern Northeast, Coast Megaregion, the Range, Piedmont Arizona and Megaregion, Texas Cascadia, Atlantic, California, Triangle. Florida, Lakes the California, Sun Gulf Front These
also Canada and megaregions. home of Mexico are the
Lakes and of Horseshoe megalopolis considered Great which include the City These part Central Megaregion – of Quebec – Windsor of Corridor, both are – Mexico. the Golden
megaregion or the been Northeast, contiguous massive the Corridor, Boston-Washington, largest DC is has one the region considered as the Traditionally area.
Lakes largest Great and to status have the Megalopolis metropolitan top Mexico. megaregion from American criterion maintain North as home Yet 2000.The States people based to by ten United population allowed and the estimates as populated 53,768,125 in of the Canada being from national most census census on region, areas 2013, numbers
figures. †2011 Census
continent the International the economic world, it North to followed making $41,830, systems. and (IMF) October have significant by the in United America's and be Fund GDP Monetary by capita evaluated per Oceania.Canada, Mexico, the in States was multifaceted richest 2016
States largest and of countries in the United economy all The three has the world.
$57,466 per (PPP) to the of In economy and of Bank, product the developed technologically most estimated domestic an the gross the 2016, three. had is World capita U.S. according
in services 22% industry sector 1.2%. comprises (estimated of 2010), and States' comprises the country's 77% United agriculture comprises The GDP
and also is Americas well. a The economy in the economy the fastest GDP as in U.S. as whole, the North America the highest per capita with growing Americas
growth in Canada mining shows the manufacturing. of and sectors services, significant
in it capita (nominal) estimated 11th had and 2014. (PPP) $44,656 per was the largest Canada's at GDP GDP
2%. (estimated and of GDP Canada's comprises 78% agriculture country's sector 20% 2010), comprises in industry the services comprises
is the of as largest 2014 Mexico capita world. and the of GDP in a $16,111 GDP per (PPP) 15th (nominal) has
and a both agricultural and maintains Mexico Being facilities newly and industrialized industrial country, operations. modern outdated
construction, is industry, Its heavy are economic well oil, main structured and income and manufactured areas. industrial financial in food, exports, main of services.The goods, American three economy sources defined electronics, North automobiles, banking
areas Caribbean Community and are and Free the (NAFTA), Central Trade Common (CARICOM), North These the Market Common Agreement American Market (CACM). American
Of two. part takes these blocs, in trade United the States
blocs and trade is Canada-Costa free larger, among Caribbean Rica Trade the countries more and other the Free there developed numerous larger often between Agreement to the American trade countries. In addition relations, Central
four world. one the Free blocs forms in largest North (NAFTA) Agreement America Trade the The of trade
designed economic implementation foreign Canada, barriers of homogenization and was and States hopes investment of United between eliminating Mexico. in with the for trade 1994 Its
trade allowed allowed the conducted already already NAFTA trade States in and without world Canada–United to and trade duty-free – United largest States experience the While Mexico and present and relations Canada do national similar to still trade. the bilateral tariffs, day taxes – a relationship
in that elimination the agreement trade. for place The had been trade tariffs on previously free States-Mexico United of allowed
the volume steadily US$791 increased in of Trade nations surface all-time has reached or an annually trade NAFTA 2010, three between billion. and 24.3% increase historical
US$17.617 largest bloc (PPP) trade The NAFTA is GDP trillion. with world's the
United largest in the of approximately fact attributed is that world's GDP economy country had is to a $14.7 This the part the States the 2010. of the nominal economy; trillion in national
other's countries each The partners. NAFTA trade of also of some are largest
Canada largest while Mexico; Mexico partner trade United other's the of and trade partners. and is largest States third The each Canada are
The signed when – was into Caribbean 15 came agreement Caribbean – nations. trade by 1973 bloc CARICOM it in
was billion. of As volume CARICOM trade 2000, US$96
passport for common of CARICOM also allowed associated for the creation a nations.
Office have largely of (OTN) bloc under on Trade trade effect. the Agreements signed into decade Negotiations Trade the Free trade focused CARICOM been past the and agreements free In
financial of Central American under attempt the area this was the agreement into stronger of cooperation. occurred American Market of engage nations in the the Central 1961; signing first this to Integration economies Common
(CAFTA) has CACM the Recent the Agreement American Free the of of future left Central implementation Trade unclear.
Republic, was signed American Trade the Central countries, by the Central American and United Dominican Agreement The five States. Free
CAFTA is a create of to trade to that focal of free NAFTA. point area similar The
United the American Canada blocs. also to States, trade has addition Central in In relations
Trade the Free the as – proposal, does. Agreement United Canada CAFTA would the Currently with much (CA4) operate under States same American Central
nations These blocs. take part trade in inter-continental also
agreement EU. Colombia Agreement has a takes part with and in Trade Free Mexico Venezuela the with G3 trade a the and
Zealand. under Eastern Southeast itself Trade Free numerous between nations, Trans-Pacific Union; Transatlantic East Australia, and European Free and US-Middle nations the Strategic United and The New the the maintained the Middle Asian States Area itself; Trade Economic between has proposed and between Partnership Area and trade agreements
nations. the 48,000 in network the km roads travels Pan-American of Americas length portion which is the mi) nearly route mainland through of in a Highway The (30,000
has routes No US branches border. officially length as Pan-American many of specific any connecting the defined officially governments Pan-American and definitive the and being Highway US exists the never have because Highway, Mexico Canadian the to part of
However, highway 26,000 total Mexico mi). portion of roughly length is from the the (16,000 the northern of to the extremity km
California of with built US First the linking was eastern on the Pacific States 1860s, in The the network in coast. railroad Railroad the the Transcontinental United
mechanized 1869 the system. at nationwide Summit, created a revolutionized decades transportation Finished golden May a and West, transportation event that the trains to the economy on American Utah, the at the population wagon Promontory network catalyzing modern of from it famous 10 of spike previous transition
transcontinental railroad connecting single railroads largest it and Although by the accomplishment, first myriad the world. status the the achieved Pacific was railroad to not an in US of system eastern
as had, 2,055 km Canadian accumulated west by Sarnia, Port Railway Grand Ontario (1,277 (GTR) of Atlantic as with than more connecting already Ontario. Michigan, Canadian track through provinces 1867, Trunk by The mi) far the Huron,
Caribbean its telephone known North the A 24 countries 17 Plan numbering an and Canada, plan and as Bermuda, shared American nations. territories: and of the integrated territories, Numbering United is system telephone States (NANP)
were Canada the States United both former British and colonies.
interplay United Canada. the is and frequent There English-speaking States cultural between
Canada, Northern the immigration Thule from has experienced Greenland e.g. many waves People.
of the some people indigenous cultural Greenland ties with Canada. shares Therefore,
former colonization of as due has colonies. also ties strong Danish a Spanish Nordic is considered and shares Greenland centuries by America Denmark.Spanish-speaking to common past North
countries where Central traditions American Maya the In developed, indigenous across civilizations and like people boundaries. modern the preserve Mexico
due Spanish-speaking common in Central to have nations geographical American and more historically Caribbean had proximity.
influenced culture the particularly the Tijuana, of the way States. Ciudad of Juárez, and in Monterrey, Mexico, strongly by Northern life is United Mexicali, and cities of
cities, Mexico. regarded Americanized has as the in been Of aforementioned city Monterrey most the
southern Immigration the a the and nations to Canada of to the border States remains of close attribute US. many United significant
influence The the decline economic the its by and of in influence the Northern and Empire Caribbean witnessed America Anglophone British region, states of Anglophone the Caribbean. on replacement have the its
people to of at the those English-speaking relatively now small partly Caribbean also remaining and living have because is due countries, populations more them of the home. than This abroad many
and States the Western United Mexico, cowboy culture. Alberta, Canada Northern a share
FIFA the the 2026 Mexico submitted host Cup. to World Canada, a and US joint bid
the in table North America, of The prominent revenue. order sports average in following leagues most shows
America (Native in America Americans of North of for manners among American in North America Table North – Turtle North Flags America of List Island America North cities folklore) Outline Name Native
Citations Footnotes
version American over Houghton Company, America Mifflin Interactive SVG Nations America" 1750–2008 "North N Non-Native animation Control of
Bridge Yuma, spanning Ocean-to-Ocean Arizona. a truss is River in The bridge through Colorado the
through was and it the the earliest in Arizona. Colorado 1915, bridge crossing example the first of lower of a Built is in highway truss
Arizona. within Pennsylvania is example a the only of truss It also
built its later carried west the Highway bridge transcontinental to 80 Originally the new Ocean-to-Ocean a bridge was and the carried successor, in 1956. until US
bicyclists. traversable the Between and bridge was traffic and and 2001, only to vehicular closed pedestrians by 1988
nation bridge and major Quechan was 2002, with to National traffic Yuma a the and restoration, Crossing a rehabilitated in Area. re-dedication the vehicular by After Heritage reopened
part bridge Historic 2018. of became in The US 80
crossing permanent Hayden of the used 1913, spanning a be following the by lower Colorado for citizens highway aid Congress, Hayden against Congressman Yuma, River. Arizona In pressure federal lobbied massive construction of proposing Carl
that opposing of to Reservation the pretense located used the Fort the bank authorized Yuma Congress in bridge the Yuma was river. it under construction on of the to connecting be Indian the
the federal Affairs It the Indian of funding would therefore, Office provided be (OIA). through was
County, providing and Imperial was California; Arizona provided $25,000. each and by of capital the Further State raised
were with bridge. new engineers OIA Washington in D.C. tasked the designing
bridge resting to truss both deck complemented a abutments be and the design through span, piers concrete steel, above truss new The upon Warren by design second was Pennsylvania river. a
OIA construction crossing from by Prison Steel at Structural awarded cost Road.The Works was Omaha June Hill in 1914, an The ferry be location a contract upstream the at the of of was to $73,800. bridge existing the
1914. bridge the Construction on began in September
were Between currents and and the February, the with Colorado. of lower both problems Steel patterns and Omaha the bridge, the October unfamiliar constructing arose flood as OIA
construction erected to washed by in aid Falsework bridge's floods. were the downstream twice
a construction bridge barges on each method; river approach floating the decided different constructing spans down by to of into span and twin Steel position. the Omaha span
on place followed and was 336 floated The 1915, carefully ft March swung m) by river down and into 3, celebration. local methodically praise and (102 span
the public completion, to on ceremoniously Following 1915. was the Bridge 22, opened May Ocean-to-Ocean
bridge U.S. was also first a the bridge became Colorado link River.On The crucial became lower part 11, Route Ocean-to-Ocean of transcontinental in nationwide the across 80. bridge the and highway November 1926, the Highway
the between and in traffic. majority state's the Arizona highway of primary Ocean-to-Ocean the transcontinental the successor auto west The became 1930s, earlier carried to Highway, 1920s east the and US to 80
deny California. state was Bridge California the find dust refugees hailing by Depression of bowl used the the officers intending work entry in to Great police to from 1930s, During Oklahoma the Ocean-to-Ocean in
between these instead and people around Yuma, found Yuma Often "Okies", County Wellton. called work
to soon refugees assistance provided critically local needed farmers. The
the foot onto Ocean-to-Ocean at In downstream 1956, bridge re-routed a newer the 80 Avenue. Fourth built US and off of was Bridge
construction steadily of importance the Fourth Interstate the Ocean-to-Ocean Following declined. 8 of of Bridge construction early vehicular and Bridge in 1970s, traffic the Avenue and the
longer Benson Similarly, US the Diego San was highway declined between transcontinental the 1977, no historic once Yuma. 80, carried, and through removed and to which from running 1964 had bridge
was In to added 1978, the of Places. National the Historic bridge Register
traffic allowed 1988. the vehicular after honor, was newly longer gained bridge the no use Despite to
In restoration project the closing was as $3 to 2001, begun, million temporarily pedestrians rehabilitation a bridge and well.
Penitentiary extensive 2002 ceremony, and and to re-dedication was Avenue. restoration re-opened carries now in traffic a Following the the bridge
by Historic Bridge Department The U.S. the Ocean-to-Ocean September Arizona of 2018. as on Transportation 80 Route 21, part designated of was
Places of Historic Yuma List Register Gillespie bridges County, Bridge Historic Arizona Arizona historic the of of of Crossing properties Register on Yuma Dam in National List in National Places Yuma, in Arizona listings
that planet's ocean is much hydrosphere. a water of a of composes An body
ocean an of Ocean. major one conventional On is the of Earth, World the divisions
Southern Oceans. Pacific, descending the (Antarctic), area, are, Arctic order by Indian, in and These Atlantic,
majority sea" or covering the interconnected body salt the refer used of specification of phrases the to without "the The "the surface. ocean" Earth's water
term, "the As a general English. American interchangeable with is sea" in not but British in ocean" "the English, mostly
into a water several ocean the Strictly covering of mi) customarily sq surface the is or biosphere. smaller seawater covers of 71% body world 361,000,000 and and (generally partly of km2 with by oceans fully divided is a ocean) seas, principal Earth's speaking, approximately sea (139,000,000 90% and approximately the a land.Saline division Earth's enclosed of
of water, 20% stated than and less been World of oceanographers mapped. The 97% has the have contains Ocean Earth's that ocean
approximately million component is the (12,100 total 3,700 1.35 cu of life, average with of weather cubic ocean The ft).As cycle, mi) carbon the world patterns. principal climate integral is nearly influences and depth kilometers volume and to Earth's billion hydrosphere, the of part meters (320 an forms is it
million. the possibly that exist over is known much the ocean because much species, the The of of World but unexplored, in number is 230,000 Ocean larger, it two of species habitat is
eon is have Earth's emergence origin the for the in The Hadean thought may and oceans of cause have are the to oceans been of formed unknown; life.
Extraterrestrial may and compounds. be composed other elements oceans or water of
the bodies of liquids although are extraterrestrial for existence oceans the in confirmed only surface there Solar large is Titan, System. evidence of stable elsewhere lakes the The of
Early large are geologic oceans. have their water had theorized histories, to and Mars Venus in
of may Mars ocean the by Venus. The was effect Mars covered boiled the suggests of runaway third once greenhouse that nearly a of away surface a global water, ocean and have hypothesis
lower dissolved quantities as as extraterrestrial its point salts convecting water or so in water that Compounds in brine exist environments large and ammonia such might in ice. freezing
speculated moon have oceans of beneath are water volume dwarf Europa ocean planets the the Earth. of twice many the surface of satellites; the over Unconfirmed to estimated and is notably, natural
layers to Solar have yet also are giant be atmospheric to liquid confirmed System's planets thought of The compositions.
within liquid water oceans on of surface exoplanets circumstellar habitable also a and including may exomoons, Oceans exist zone.
are a with liquid. of a Ocean planet surface with hypothetical covered completely type planets
be the Ōkeanós, the in [ɔːkeanós]), divine the river the the believed mythology, personification word Ὠκεανός comes from Romans Greeks to Oceanus classical sea, encircling an world. ancient The in elder of the figure (; enormous by Titans pronounced ocean of Greek: the and Greek antiquity, classical
of an connection. has concept Ōkeanós The Indo-European
Vṛtra-, cows/rivers. epithet to Ōkeanós captured Vedic Greek predicated the who ā-śáyāna-, of has the the dragon compared been
represented this some on notion, the is vases. Greek dragon-tail early with a Related to Okeanos
World to ocean. Ocean is generally separate interconnected water or several referred body as Though as oceans, sometimes the salt the global of described global,
and The part criteria. listed and archipelagos, of continents, other a in of among interchange volume fundamental are to of relatively free – – water concept is area oceanic continuous with descending oceanography.The in below divisions its order the parts various defined by importance major body of
and are seas, fringed water of bights, smaller, bodies adjoining straits. such by Oceans as gulfs, bays,
of and that is world. the The world part ridges global form and in are mountain connected single mid-ocean longest system ocean mid-oceanic a the of ridge every range the
than range (several longest continental is mi) (40,000 long mountain the range). longer 65,000 Andes, The the km mountain times continuous
by and ocean different biological physical vertical zones defined conditions. the Oceanographers into divide
divided categorized and depth be further The regions includes into light all regions, can pelagic open abundance. and ocean zone by
m; from and is where it can biodiverse. most the the photic occur a surface photosynthesis zone therefore, the the includes of depth oceans The to region is, 200
either Because deeper another the life must on from plants source. rely sinking find marine found material photosynthesis, than above require energy (see or snow) zone photic
zone vents known the what is source primary m). the as are energy of in aphotic 200 exceeding (depths Hydrothermal
the part of the is as pelagic epipelagic. zone known photic The
of part into according pelagic temperature. vertical further the aphotic regions The can divided to be zone
mesopelagic the region. uppermost is The
the thermocline is lowermost in generally Its at °C 12 (2,300–3,300 boundary ft). a which, of (54 700–1,000 tropics meters lies at °F),
(20,000 boundary at 10 and lying 4 Next 6,000 ft). °C is abyssopelagic, and and about ft) meters ft), the the lower top plain between °F), 39 2,000–4,000 (6,600–13,100 along between 700–1,000 whose lying typically meters abyssal lies the (50 of the bathypelagic meters is (2,300–3,300
hadalpelagic. as The last zone and known is deep includes the oceanic the trench,
is lies ft) the deepest and meters oceanic (20,000–36,000 6,000–11,000 zone. between This
to are correspond benthic the zones and The zones deep-sea. three aphotic of the deepest
to bathyal the covers ft). down slope 4,000 zone about continental meters (13,000 The
the and 4,000 abyssal 6,000 covers zone m. between abyssal The plains
which trenches. the oceanic found is to zone in Lastly, hadalpelagic the hadal corresponds zone,
and neritic two zone subregions: into the zone. further the zone The oceanic pelagic can be subdivided
above encompasses water oceanic directly includes mass the whereas the zone continental the neritic shelves zone completely all open water. The the
littoral the conditions. the zone region high covers and contrast, the tide between and area and transitional In represents between marine low terrestrial
it of is the zone the affects known region. the level It the where as also intertidal conditions is area because tide
dramatic in thermocline. changes If with a it depth, a contains zone temperature undergoes
thermocline deeper tropical is than higher typically The the thermocline at latitudes.
generally polar Polar cold surface little receive lack greater not as stratified by a are at solar and water latitudes nearly which are temperature relatively as energy, because water waters, at thermocline depths.
°C. from is 3 cold, ranging very thermocline, the −1 °C Below water to
contains cold deep bulk ocean Because 3.9 °C. the layer world temperature the the and is this of water, average ocean of
it salinity contains undergoes a in If dramatic with depth, a changes halocline. zone
vertical with a chemocline. zone chemistry a gradient undergoes strong, If it contains depth, a
with the pronounced a thermocline, halocline The pycnocline. the combination produces coincides and often
currents Oceanic have origins. maritime different
may headlands. they are are around in places, tide, the various certain most Tidal form hence knots phase with quasiperiodic; notably in currents
the densities. and currents Non-periodic have different waves, wind for origin
surface and “drift wind (designated as waves currents The currents”). create
hourly the movement varies waves quasi-permanent the decompose These currents can effect scale) movement seconds of rapid (which one within of one the and couple Stokes of (at current echelon of drift a in under
).).
and quasi-permanent a current of waves takes surface.This dominant accelerated the the acceleration on governing in the waves, direction place the is of current the effect, of lesser and wind friction The breaking wind. of by the in by
earth the when in while Accordingly, with direction sea depth lowers speed. their the the of the of currents proportion changes depth, the rotation friction increases, of increase
a spiral. changes Ekman with in null: seen as sea depth, becoming and the direction direction known At is current inverted the current speed certain opposite the
surface, layer experienced mainly mixed these often at ocean depth. The influence the 800 to 400 maximum is from meters of the of currents of
dependent These various on can and the currents seasons. alter, considerably yearly are change
(10 between by direction the the 20 maritime mixed to oblique deep less layer water caused density at until current of Thermocline.In thick salinity an quasi-permanent the temperature gradients adopts the relation and the virtually extreme in wind, the surface is the to becoming homogeneous, the meters), however, the masses. direction If are currents
the 2 breaking In maritime measurement intense often that are knots. and reach zones, so 1 so waves low, littoral currents depth to
heat currents Ocean to tropics the regions. climate Earth's by transferring affect the from greatly polar
to winds inland. air coastal cold or and carry precipitation them regions, may Transferring warm
part create fluxes density gradients large-scale the circulation freshwater of drive that heat circulation. ocean global and thermohaline Surface
in role thus polar heat important plays in supplying It ice regulation. an regions, and to the sea
in on Changes significant energy have thought are to thermohaline budget. impacts the Earth's circulation
governs far significantly also In which the surface, the waters deep influence carbon it reach the circulation dioxide may as atmospheric concentrations. so thermohaline at rate
For see the changes discussion shutdown to a possibilities circulation under thermohaline the of global of circulation. thermohaline of warming,
and The oceans. Current encircles influencing Antarctic currents the in Circumpolar several climate that continent, connecting area's
of called over the weather the oceans: depending tropical dramatic forms One of the "typhoons" cyclones "hurricanes" upon (also forms). and most system where occurs
a has biosphere. The ocean the significant effect on
determine and wind a as and phase of most of rainfall, source temperatures land. evaporation, cycle, climate ocean the life that is on water the patterns affect Oceanic
to within Life the 3 evolved ocean on years billion life land. prior
photosynthetic, depth dinoflagellates, from distance also the well of that plants Algae region.As biodiversity Bacteria of of world the many and : of throughout single-celled source evolved and "catch-all" some in diatoms, is is ocean, organisms ubiquitous edible organisms ocean, Archaea immense, the animals algae as but to as the the such from found it the Pyropia, green prokaryotes the each : strongly shore in the nori (including distinct term life like include eukaryotes, many bacteria, which the a diversity thought brown such as that algae, including: environments algae, single-celled present and the and multicellular extreme prokaryotes : algae like influence kelp). red inhabit life many as (including is Both environments algae seaweed), is
phyla the and as urchins many ocean, are sea (such including Plants species and such in Fungi corals diverse oceanic as sponges, or inhabit jellyfish), (such environments Echinoderms sea have many mangroves with comb found that marine stars). jellies, as : environments fungi : found and Animals Brachiopods, are that only grasses, in marine : roles sea animal most Cnidaria including
addition, of and crabs, fish, crustaceans cetaceans land have oceans. groups other and squid), whales, (includes (includes their familiar animal on adapted to the including octopus in lobsters, sharks, porpoises).In major the shrimp), live and a (includes primarily animals dolphins, cephalopods part ocean, Many life living many
of life birds a are have adapted group the mainly instance, a that to diverse oceans. For on seabirds
They feed animals lifetime most spend going breeding. on of on only many land their and on water, for marine
have oceans pelicans. as that are space penguins, their Other living to seagulls adapted and birds
also most sea turtles, spend turtles, in time of oceans. Seven species of their the the
halocline. of A salinity depth with is zone rapid increase a called
of increases. The maximum density salt content decreases of seawater its temperature as
Freezing boiling temperature temperature salinity, decreases with salinity. of water increases with of and water
Typical −2 around at °C at atmospheric freezes seawater pressure.
as evaporation, precipitation be the in If temperate salinity is regions, and lower. will polar case exceeds
If the evaporation case higher. is in exceeds tropical precipitation, regions, salinity will be as
using waters a ions the chlorinity, measure oceanic regions.Salinity salinity total chlorine, have in and than Thus, iodine) of oceanic can temperate in in halogen of is lower seawater. polar fluorine, bromine, be the tropical and content (includes regions waters calculated which mass
the determine is chlorinity about × average Salinity to thus, 1.80655 following salinity around (in ‰)The is international = and, 34.7‰ average Chlorinity the salinity: ‰) 19.2‰, is used (in agreement, formula By
ocean surface. the as rising ocean partial alternate and waves, of falling The or of motions the are known the and undulations surface,
air mechanical the swell. series between waves The called interface along of and propagate water is that
to the thought in known bodies Solar oceans. surface of are only Earth is other Although only water large its on and the with System, have stable the celestial one liquid planet large bodies
Way that it's that In common likely oceans reported in scientists exoplanets June Milky studies. galaxy, be the 2020, mathematical may NASA with based modeling on
geology are and surfaces Jupiter Saturn, planetary lack have not is and gas stratum understood. giants, a hydrogen; well liquid thought instead The however to of their
hot, compressed, giants having ice hypothesised. possibility atmospheres Uranus supercritical under and been Neptune has the water highly thick of The their
was ice surface water and not Although are study out (much oceanic covered some the diamond though possible.The of by water composition in Mars ruled that the the their is Mars a a of on still the of have "ocean" such suggests a liquid oceans is on existing water, of third once Mars 2006 of by ocean though Neptune, possibility fully studies Wiktorowicz longer no that exotic Ingersall hypothesis understood, residing nearly it caps). suggested
studied continues apparent along disappearance. possibility The their be reasons with to for
oceans have had over liquid Astronomers Venus water perhaps think may for that now and years. billion 2
Ganymede is water decouple layer on global Triton. thought Titan, satellites crust liquid and less be certainty, natural the mantle Europa, thick to from the enough and, the present of Enceladus Callisto, to with A
on to ocean present is A Io. thought be magma
Geysers about have shell. Enceladus, originating the ice moon kilometers Saturn's mi) (6.2 been beneath an found 10 possibly ocean from surface on
be internal as thought have to to or they oceans not considered once oceans, are have also the or present moons and are to liquid lakes may of of hydrocarbons bodies referred surface icy Titan, oceans enough had sometimes are seas. be have now Other that frozen.Large although large may internal on
what Cassini–Huygens lost space might be dry have appeared lakebeds it that to channels, Titan suggesting and liquids discovered had. surface only The initially mission had what empty river
provided showed Later Titan series radar infrared regions. flybys and in lakes the of polar images of hydrocarbon colder that a
atop that to ice a the addition its mix Titan forms have to the thought ocean in hydrocarbon liquid-water is outer subsurface crust. under
its 100 Orcus bodies a core although to liquid-water determine are of to approximately decay and km trans-Neptunian solid they that to of differentiated oceans, suggest is differentiated Pluto, whether beneath under icy radioactive oceans ocean and mantle Ceres may the Sedna, harbour models thick. a surface.Not be of icy appears larger have Eris, enough 180 crusts known and rocky objects capable supporting into
and dwarf Pluto formed. consequently was a it habitable, been may have 2020, the when In have that first may reported ocean, evidence planet astronomers June had subsurface
Earth likely the Solar planets belt". water including possible or Some System similar the habitable outside "liquid-water satellites are planets in oceans, to natural zone and to have ocean
detection The likely and spectroscopy however extremely is difficult method, oceans, through inconclusive. of even the
making GJ VII, of exotic that its have composed 75% it been Theoretical used ice up 1214 with is transit, detected models by of form planet. probability of b, predict high ocean making to an mass,
their actually zone little position planet though mass Other merely known of possible in the composition. candidates are their is based on include speculated habitable and
scientists "ocean-like" may speculate Some an be Kepler-22b planet.
581 surface been Models proposed have include oceans. that d for could Gliese
an of is Gliese speculated b to have ice". ocean "hot 436
particularly Exomoons have gas surface may zone theoretically habitable star's planets, within parent oceans. giants orbiting their
will and it go some ocean an acquire be water ocean. into of it surface steam magma planets the atmosphere, Terrestrial cools buried which in will on accretion, a forming when atmosphere to will the collapse of the their but most during will
water also tens will "super-Earth millions the outgassing be expected years of oceans for may within happen low their magma a There hundreds mass even water solidifies—this produce be last so of as impact." mantle commonly from planets exoplanets will of to with to water, composed of major their percentage of the accretionary of
can water, lakes example for and liquids Titan. of other on bodies the of hydrocarbon seas, composed lakes be other Oceans, liquids than
possibility seas considered but also of on Triton out. ruled nitrogen The was of
that or icy surfaces water and liquid are evidence Enceladus There Europa, water–ammonia. Callisto, is of dense on shells Titan the moons floating of oceans very Ganymede, the
the planet water. covered often ocean 70% is Earth because is called in it
be magma the will close that to planets ocean. tidally extremely one and terrestrial be star are so planet their locked will a Extrasolar half parent of
formation result during magma of point oceans at possible a It impacts. some that planets as had giant terrestrial is their also
on leaving their could Neptunes escape, close behind via their atmospheres surface. liquids star hydrodynamic various to their Hot with the lose cores
not and although acid, liquids. suitable Where might liquids do water.Supercritical ethane, liquids, chemicals in cyanide, ammonia, oxide, silane, fluids, sulfuric argon, properties exist on abundant as with share nitric hydrogen, carbon phosphine, neon, volatile and are methane, temperatures various include sulfide, hydrogen quantities planets disulfide, nitrogen, pressures, there hydrogen hydrazine, that
that and atmospheres are Neptune, volatiles. high-density water, fluid planets and of of of mixtures planets these Uranus the the oceans expected is ammonia of Underneath other it hot thick composed
of gaseous Jupiter The of transition smoothly outer supercritical layers Saturn and hydrogen. into oceans
The atmosphere which carbon surface. 96.5% is Venus fluid of a supercritical dioxide, its at is
Huge Ocean Life Extraterrestrial Looking of Blowing National Ocean and The To Portal – Oceanic Curlie Ocean the Science Daily Titan Mind Ocean-bearing Places Right and oceans continents". Science Ocean at Have For Underground NOAA – Likely Planets: Oceans Administration Atmospheric Origins All Smithsonian In :: |
Oceans. the Atlas of UN
"southern Panama prehistoric Oceania sighted (in Europeans Núñez and Isthmus discovered by the when in peoples named Vasco de which eastern Balboa 16th Ocean Though crossed of great sea" explorer the Sur Spanish the traveled times, century 1513 and the have the was del since Spanish). early the first in Pacific he Mar Pacific of Asia
ocean's Spanish Ferdinand winds explorer ocean. reaching name on in world during current the favorable by 1521, he of Magellan the was Portuguese as circumnavigation The coined encountered the
in it means Portuguese Mar and "peaceful sea". Spanish called both Pacífico, He which
occurred in prehistoric Pacific in the Important times. migrations human
towards with all trade the Madagascar; and art to the BC, Micronesia, their to New east 3000 long-distance to along south Oceania and (intermarrying and on and the of Indonesia, Polynesia.Long-distance maritime and peoples southeast coast from languages the Guinea themselves islands Taiwan Papuans); native About west Asia; the towards of mastered the Japan. Philippines, Austronesian travel canoe of Southeast Melanesia Mozambique developed island spread and
Australia. Indonesian to extended apparently therefore Trade, not but knowledge, and islands the
In Fu 219 Pacific into out immortality. of elixir for BC the Xu sailed the searching
controlled in when at this By settlement or Canton Islamic was of a much trade Muslims. least significant Arabs 878 there by was
1404 Zheng to He expeditions 1433 Indian the Ocean. led From into
the Pacific Afonso Francisco China of Abreu western was Maluku Malacca. in by Islands, the António Álvares's Sunda European to de made Portuguese and ordered de the and the both expeditions to edge the from Islands, Albuquerque via southern navigators first Ocean in The Jorge 1513, of by with 1512, Serrão, of Lesser with expedition contact
new reached his ocean a ocean. discovered Balboa Vasco 1513 de Spanish and expedition in of side crossed after the Isthmus eastern explorer by the was Panama The Núñez of
(literally, it the South" isthmus or Sea") the coast where del the to south of the observed Pacific. because of of "South "Sea He first the the Sur ocean was Mar named he
in the Pacific recorded to first his were and history. the Magellan Ferdinand In crew 1520, navigator cross
Islands that were to eventually in would Spice circumnavigation. first world Spanish the expedition the of result part a They
Magellan sailing expedition off after Pacífico Horn, waters. the because, meaning, through "Pacific" seas stormy found called the "peaceful") Cape (or ocean calm the
the of the often called ocean until in was Sea Magellan The honor century. his eighteenth
1521. at island stopped uninhabited at Guam March Magellan stopping in one Pacific before
Although of expedition navigator himself Elcano Hope, the Indian completing Spanish in the Ocean round to 1522. Good remains the Juan led back 1521, world in the the Sebastián in first died Spain and of Magellan the Cape circumnavigation across Philippines
of Aru Sailing expeditions around the the discovered 1527, Islands, and Moluccas, and Papua the 1525 between New Guinea. Portuguese Caroline Islands, east and
ships Miguel de also and the sailed Mexico to López Japan.In Legazpi, ocean led 379 1564, the Spanish and crossed Mariana the Philippines from five 1542–43 explorers In Islands. carrying Portuguese by reached
and Mexico Philippines establishing the and across Ocean was with from 16th century, influence Guam, to paramount, Spanish Pacific of For remainder the East the Indies. via ships Spanish sailing the the Peru
and one routes for in longest galleons trade half two operated in Manila The the centuries, and history. Acapulco, linking Manila of a
by the Marquesas, Australia the the Tuvalu, the the navigator quest Terra Vaz 17th de named such the explorations the Pedro discovered New and led in Portuguese Southern ("the discovered Islands, the in Islands, the expeditions after Queirós, South Torres expedition the Admiralty and and Solomon also sailed between [great] century, de Spanish Islands Vanuatu Strait Australis Pitcairn and Fernandes Torres. Cook Luís Guinea, archipelagos, navigator for Spanish Land"), in Pacific.Later, as the
to and coast made the parts landed New Willem in on the closed considered Dutch Spain Janszoon, 17th and sailing and first Zealand in mare the Cape Africa, Peninsula, European the in 1642.In (1606), Tasman of completely around southern landing centuries, York documented and and powers. 16th clausum—a continental circumnavigated Abel Ocean Tasmania Australia Australian discovered and explorers, also Janszoon naval other a trade; discovery in engaged Pacific sea
sent non-Spanish only known the from to at of prevent patrolled fleets was Atlantic, As Magellan by entrance the entrance Strait the ships. of times
Russians marked Dutch the On led Bering. side Ocean First Spanish western by Islands, the Philippines.The threatened Northern exploration officer Russian the by as 18th Alaska of Great major and the the the the Pacific navy such of expedition Danish in Expedition, Kamchatka the Vitus the beginning century and the Aleutian
Northwest, the southern Island Canada, reaching Spain to and Pacific sent in also Alaska. Vancouver expeditions
the Hawaii, the North The Cook French Pacific made and Pacific settled and Northwest. American and South James Australia, British and Polynesia, to with the three explored voyages
with the Bougainville first Pierre-Antoine of precision de width In 1768, in Pacific his Antoine Louis astronomer established on the a accompanying time exploration, the history. for Véron, young voyage of
voyages was of Spain earliest by One of of the exploration organized scientific in the 1789–1794. Expedition Malaspina
and vast South Zealand, of Horn Alaska, the New areas the Pacific, the Australia, from It and Philippines, Pacific. sailed Guam Cape to
United Growing the of 19th during much century later and powers, imperialism Japan and European the occupation of resulted Oceania States. in the by
the HMS in by oceanographic voyages USS the Tuscarora HMS Challenger the with 1830s, knowledge made Darwin and 1870s; German Beagle during to the Charles (1873–76); were Gazelle of aboard; contributions (1874–76). Significant the
respectively. imperial protectorates position making and and New Oceania, In 1853, France a in power after Tahiti 1842 as leading obtained Caledonia
Chile negotiated in officer the the and in Rapanui visits Policarpo Toro 1875 1887, 1888. Island Easter After native with into navy of navy to Chilean island incorporation
occupying nations. joined Island, imperial Easter Chile By the
the all from war, the the Chile.Although control islands 1900 in however, in Guam defeated was Fleet occupied the the War; the were of gained ocean. 1898, of Philippines many Pacific and of United States was master United nearly the other Japan, 1914 virtual U.S. islands of by Japan Pacific Pacific Japan during by By the Britain, of control and Germany, western States, most end controlled and France, and Pacific that Spain
States. Japanese-ruled United came control The under Northern the the Islands Mariana of
many World in War Pacific the II, become colonies the former Since independent of end have states.
Pacific has islands of The world. most in Ocean the the
Pacific There islands in Ocean. are about 25,000 the
be into divided within Melanesia entirely groups The Micronesia, as Ocean main can three Polynesia. Pacific the islands known and
island equator the Date world's Caroline the east Marshall the Pacific in the in of includes largest southeast.Melanesia, Islands in the Islands the of Micronesia, International Guinea, and islands. southwest, after to and of the the the north west second lies Greenland center, which the Mariana New islands Kiribati the includes Line, to the of by far northwest, the Islands and largest the
main types: Islands, The in Tonga north area, Melanesian Society to to encompasses continental Kermadec Bismarck the Tokelau, platforms. uplifted Cook Archipelago, the the coral Cruz, groups stretching Tuamotu, Islands, Santa reefs Islands the the to are four other Islands center, the also Ocean Caledonia.The New from islands, the Austral the Mangareva New west, Islands, largest coral south, east.Islands the to and and and islands, Island Solomon high Islands and and Easter Tuvalu, Pacific Zealand and Marquesas basic Islands, Fiji from in the north of the Vanuatu, Polynesia, Hawaii in in south are Samoa,
and and outside the islands of New include the lie Philippines. Guinea, Continental islands Zealand, andesite New line the
continents. nearby these structurally Some islands are associated with of
origin, active many volcanoes. are contain and volcanic High islands of
low-lying Bougainville, South the reefs the structures coral of are flows the surface. ocean's lava Solomon built under that Among are Islands.The up these basaltic on and Hawaii, have Pacific
off Reef northeastern Australia patches. is One the of chains most Barrier with reef of dramatic the Great
larger low island formed uplifted is is type which usually platform, coral A coral slightly the islands. coral of second than the
(formerly Ocean and of Polynesia. Island) Makatea the Banaba French group include in Tuamotu Examples
miles). volume 50.1 about Ocean, has 714 estimated water, the cubic cubic been at world's oceanic of the percent (171 The kilometers some million representing of million Pacific
water areas equator. 30 (29.5 °F), near of temperatures vary °C freezing (86 in about °C the in −1.4 from the water, Surface the point sea can poleward Pacific °F) to the
a Salinity also reaching in latitudinally, of maximum southeastern 37 varies thousand parts area. per the
which low salinity that of year. less the than equatorial the is as throughout 34 The equator, precipitation parts found per as thousand, have near the mid-latitudes can salty because water abundant a in
seawater are lowest found these evaporation in the less than frigid takes thousand less The place per north as areas. parts of in counts 32 far of
clockwise (the Pacific Hemisphere the generally North waters Northern and the in Southern counter-clockwise The gyre) of Pacific motion is Hemisphere. in
Equatorial westward rejoin at north turns turns warm Current. to forks while moves or near Kuroshio North about the rest the Japan the become North Equatorial Current, trade the 45°N, eastward Current, Aleutian some Current.Turning the southward water as Kuroshio winds, along and Philippines northward latitude the the The by 15°N driven to
Sea. and counter-clockwise North the a The in base approaches America Bering branches it as forms Current of Aleutian circulation the
arm slow, southern Its chilled Current. south-flowing becomes the California
west the New Circumpolar Earth-circling main westerly South circulation flowing South east along 50°S, Pacific, equator, includes Current. Current, joins which turns swings of southward at Guinea, of the about The the and east Equatorial Antarctic the
coast, approaches Peru north the divides; turns or As Current Equatorial it form Cape other branch Chilean around the to Horn the flows the one Current. South and Humboldt
and Southern patterns climate Northern of Hemispheres mirror generally other. The each the
contrasting southern ocean more with, and winds the east conditions. preferred conditions due to El temperatures Russia while tropical British subtropical The eastern Pacific steady milder Oscillation Niño example, Pacific currents.In the affects off the trade Columbia months winter cold during are on remarkably are weather in weather Southern the the flow of the the varied in winter Pacific, the far and North (ENSO) with for coast of
and three-month in determine than surface To normal Niña recent the phase if is that computed, of to the region Niño 3,000 0.5 for °C (0.9 sea approximately most the or considered temperature for is the La average then period, southeast is area ENSO, km more (1,900 an below or °F) the El above of progress. Hawaii mi)
season Asian the with western tropical months in and the blow winds from landmass. In over related the dry monsoon summer wet the ocean during Pacific, contrast the the winter the which
temperatures surface temperatures when cyclone summer, greatest; the activity its however, patterns. is peaks basin difference Worldwide, the each in sea seasonal particular tropical own and between aloft late has
most the worldwide the is least On May while September month. is a month, active active scale,
are only the in cyclone which November is all basins tropical the active. month
the tropical the hosts Pacific. and basins, cyclone northwestern two most The active eastern are Pacific which Pacific the
moving between in of southwestern south occasionally Pacific typhoons Pacific the into while Asia the southeast forming May sometimes December. form northwestern hurricanes coast June western the to States Mexican striking and and United October, and Mexico, east from
form they cyclones basin, in the where Pacific island nations. South Tropical also impact occasionally
October persistent from June a can while for December. In arctic, from to to hazard fog shipping May present the icing occurs
of A the in Gulf winter the coast low months. mild southern wet Alaska during the climatological keeps and
due stream strong, Westerlies the and within difference between to especially Southern the jet associated can The the be particularly tropics coldest the temperature on in planet. records Hemisphere, readings which and temperature Mid-Latitudes the the Antarctica,
is refer with Southern according the extratropical In to riding varying cyclones Fifties to as conditions Shrieking degrees and and usual cloudy hemisphere, the Sixties the Forties, because latitude. the associated the it of the to jet stormy of Westerlies Furious Roaring stream,
by 1522. to pacific 1519 Ortelius; Maris as it from Abraham of "a called he ocean Magellan's Ferdinand his was Pacifici it circumnavigation The during description mapped sea" following first
(pacific) calm line is the the Magellan, most seemed it To Pacific. significant distinction regional in than Atlantic.The andesite more much the
from petrologic it its of igneous felsic separates continental margins. the mafic igneous rock the Pacific A areas rock submerged the boundary, partially deeper, of Basin on Central
of Japan, the the Kamchatka the islands passes Mariana eastern Islands, Islands, andesite Solomon south Island. off line edge of New Aleutian along the of edge Kuril follows arc, The western California Islands, Peninsula, the the Zealand's and the and North the
edge The continues along Mexico, Andes to islands South dissimilarity then Cordillera of along to America California. the off western returning the the northeastward
outside New Philippines, andesite line. the the Indonesia, New lie Japan, Zealand and Guinea,
are volcanic most line submerged basin. of closed Within the the characterize the the andesite volcanic that loop and islands deep mountains, of Pacific oceanic troughs,
and lavas chains, island eroded gently clusters. build dome-shaped form Here out rifts summits basaltic whose huge volcanic to flow mountains of arcs,
is explosive foremost line, type, the Outside volcanism. and volcanism Pacific the Ring andesite the belt is of world's explosive of Fire of the
Fire of after that is the hundred the The active zones. above several sit volcanoes subduction various Ring named
The is Ocean Pacific almost which only totally bounded subduction by the is ocean zones.
and the coasts have zones. Antarctic no Only Australian nearby subduction
200 of about generally the of The called years breakup Ocean million it the Pangea, born ago years million Panthalassic 750 until Ocean the although Pacific was is ago. Rodinia, breakup at
now. oldest Pacific only old, 180 subducted with crust is Ma around floor The by Ocean older
hotspot several seamount The contains long by chains, Pacific formed volcanism. Ocean
and Louisville Hawaiian–Emperor chain include Ridge. the These the seamount
the Pacific's great The depths. hampered exploitation is mineral of ocean's the wealth by
the along continental are and In Nicaragua, of Australia, Japan, waters in of the Australia declining of sharply volume Zealand, pearls and New gas and coasts some harvested and Papua Philippines, shelves cases. New natural petroleum shallow extracted, Panama, the off Guinea, although in coasts are the
are Fish asset economic in important Pacific. the an
more well salmon, yield waters continents of swordfish, The sardines, temperate and the islands as and as shallower herring, tuna, snapper, shoreline shellfish. the
in serious areas. has Overfishing become problem a some
the Sea half For coast rich overfishing. by the catches of the example, 1990s off have result grounds fishing in been since a at Russian of reduced as Okhotsk the least
Pacific in quantity small The north-east hundredfold the between a 1972 fragments increased and floating plastic Ocean of 2012.
between The is California of garbage times Japan Pacific and ever-growing Great patch France. size three the
An 1.8 of metric estimated totaling pieces. tons 80,000 plastic patch, inhabit the trillion
generic pollution of Marine for is term harmful or particles. ocean the into entry the chemicals a
are culprits rivers disposing the The using those main for waste. their of
ocean, then also fertilizers rivers into bringing chemicals agriculture. used The often empty as in the
oxygen-depleting litter, The the a chemicals human-created debris, has in of water ended ocean, known leads sea, to in hypoxia dead waterway. floating up excess as is that and also or of the lake, creation zone.Marine a marine waste
to served coastlines, the litter.From Oceanic the United Marshall and site of debris at on frequently for is aground various of tests accumulate Proving as and States 1946 Islands 67 gyres was it center to washing where nuclear as atolls. tends beach Grounds Pacific 1958, the known the
the site Atmosphere incident.In lost one-megaton nuclear Pacific weapons during including Research including Mars Pacific 96, the lost and Ocean, Satellite. 1965 as A-4 Ocean has Philippine Fobos-Grunt, served bomb the in Upper the addition, crash of Several satellites, were Sea
and Ocean download derived data Viewer buoy PMEL Realtime Pacific Niño Currents and TAO satellite observational Pacific ocean Current In-situ EPIC of profiling Realtime Collection NOAA collection Realtime NOAA data Surface scatterometer Argo data Data Analyses Viewable Near-realtime NOAA Surface observations Pacific Ocean Ocean floats Ocean El data El altimeter Ocean NOAA Data Pacific data Ocean on-line plot (OSCAR) from Niño –
and plans. the is economic economic take place where planned goods a production according investment, to capital and allocation economy of plans economy-wide A production system of type
participatory planning. decentralized, forms or A planned use may of economy centralized, economic Soviet-type
have such decentralization although level Socialist of socialism. used of of in on employed.Socialist and minority based states adopted planning central mechanism degree Yugoslavia of specific have model the the planning, on depends participation some as or Republic type a The the Soviet decision-making Federal market centralization
as replaces make various abolitionist the that the direct socially-owned economic means factor Market economy. the markets up enterprises with activities to the coordinate calculation socialism of
and in to some economies, make economies, from markets information firms mechanisms pricing on based and have about proposing planning and and economists planning market operating with computer science More advances approaches investment. allocation economies production, decisions autonomous come specifically unplanned computer technology.Planned where distribution, in contrast scientists recent socialist
to market indicative mixed as economies economies mixed planned Market use planning referred and economies, market economies. variously that are
uses these before administrative-command the former planning market and and Soviet follows an economies. A of Union countries Soviet-type system command which converted characteristic was Eastern economy Bloc of economic most to
authorities command by and of in systems.In administration highlights central decisions are in of production the public these of economic resources economies, are made and role allocation imposed important hierarchical the allocation This guiding ownership by law. government
conscious the understanding goes planning. of This against Marxist
libertarian has council libertarian other been by rejection planning Marxists type advocated has Union. as democratic been in proposed of the socialism, of of Decentralized variously who planning in adopted non-market Soviet a a and total anarchists, form and socialism and for of basis communists, advocate the socialists the economy
for Hellenistic Arabian, Egyptian characteristic the the barbaric "compulsory to condition lesser empires". countryside, and degree southern In the the state a and India, more and of the Seleucid, world, the for post-Hellenistic trade regions most planning the the Hellenistic Pergamenian, Parthian was
type utilization the around and economy was of of Scholars a centered argued Incan instead flexible goods. command that have movement the labor economy, of
1918 mercantilism 1921. economy government of view when it with One war the economy.The started in Soviet communism and Gosplan 1921, sees in Soviet-style in planned planned a ended founded as
the the before period regular five-year 1928. intervened plans Economic New However, started of in Policy
in after direction non-coercive in government through France World was economy II. of Britain Dirigisme, practiced War the or Great means, and
implemented public-housing Swedish in The called 1974. planned to planning from in project urban similar Programme, models a 1965 fashion Million government as a
Revolution of notably 1936. in Revolutionary Catalonia, during economic implemented Spanish planning been Some Spain, the in participation most across has decentralised
of to economy. markets order some or of an economic of the form equivalent capital in coordination of replacement planning with ex-ante socialism the economic concept While influential socialism planned of not planning conception economy, to to involves the a is achieve
economic the product such by that be so by the to the system of over the an surplus the The is conscious control would of goal population, use producers. controlled specifically economy achieve
forms the socialism their and socialist proposed of calculation The of are subjects specific for planning feasibility debate.
Chile still launched When government. in computer technology data the was and firms development between of in administration a corporation its socialist early the in stages every Cybersyn economic Allende 1971, the machine of Project the the for and of organisation install communication economy to telex
also a data computer-simulated for fed was into The forecasting. economy
economy. control observation management of and overall the realtime for room built A was
rule abolished of towards was moved economy. around trucker's 1973 military market it program a coup a a dictatorship the the and used his Chile was Pinochet but showed that to strike, after under redirect a promise in Pinochet more supplies established The CIA-backed when liberalized led project Augusto prototype-stage
economy computer (1993), planned thesis free-market built a stable New possible and and from book how University the Allin would and University from Socialism Forest scientist economist than of their is economically democratically it Cockshott that also to a both on morally Cottrell drives Glasgow demonstrate the computer claim the technology the more economies the Paul Wake modern the Towards In desirable. be
been to computers optimal use for in an variously of fashion economies. has coordinate socialist production proposed The
participative of that Allende's quantities inputs is allocating at decentralised multitude was socialist solving with in economic physical of Lange system for Cyberfolk pioneered move efficient bottom-up Chilean the economy than model participative computer of of autonomous The efficiently the the an monetary towards algedonic units required planned decision-making government system Polish form 1970 viable the in argued or of setting organisational equations process attempt to operative experimental Oskar (either economist structure computed by Cybersyn market simultaneous terms decision the by a distributed prices).The though component. democracy the Salvador and Project an support in more feedback
in Backward 2000 1888 has around The fictional by planned year become a socialist economy the utopia. a novel which a Looking Bellamy United Edward States depicts
The diametrically Orwell's Eighty-Four Airstrip Huxley's command George aims. both opposed albeit fictional World New State of and One examples Brave Aldous are World Nineteen with in in economies,
designed designed a engender the is as productivity economy is shortage totalitarian The of agent while control. to consumer a an economy latter former social
Airstrip Plenty. Ministry One the euphemistically of by named is organized
economies portrayals literary work. an influence We were planned Yevgeny which Orwell's Zamyatin's of on was Other
was an We. story Like economy by Ayn Nineteen that influenced command Anthem Eighty-Four, was a of dystopian Rand's artistic portrayal also
of opposed We planned that the difference Brave economy World. primitivist advanced was a it The is technology as to or New
economic to and can objectives serve capital labour government state. land, the the of harness The
be development investment capital a pattern. economic greater in demand in can for restrained favor Consumer desired of
favorably capitalist nations In nations such infant international health mortality compared with comparisons, in life as indicators expectancy. and state-socialist
the of can regards statistics depending to were the Soviet used.The industry financing. definitions WHO infant to mortality, once for accumulate state through begin building years a underdeveloped waiting whether least external without and of on varied economy reliance light in in an capital reality at or this, at on official without industry heavy However, expansion
gross to of the when to private forced national in percent. is the eighty what 1930s from happened Soviet share government the Union income consumption fifty This percent the dedicated during
the its heavy both industry, massive in experienced this a with a and to shortage, relative As development, due agricultural labour terms. concurrent contraction in sector Soviet growth of result of Union absolute massive
of the to economies both they period. greater economies and fluctuations both showed 1950s during American of economists by contrary than Studies expectations same found the Bloc market in command Eastern of output the and that the groups Eastern European 1960s in
(in cannot serve planners preferences, and this and economy, shortages with sufficient market economies detect therefore Critics cannot intended to argue production price free co-ordinate purpose). system consumer a accuracy of efficiently that is planned surpluses a
theory while and the in their underpinnings allowing by market was argued their stressed power meet a are theory to way who the individuals of of calculation to their have Friedrich particular most von and resources the notably the a their efficiently. about Ludwig only of to to most it hierarchy labor ones competing economists former needs have most only of is the use the economy Hayek, local the referred value written knowledge aspects consumers the the in the value, those possess knowledge marketplace latter constantly distinct subtly changing This a circumstances to satisfy of who subjective that the theoretical needs by problem difficulty to problem, and of as problem individual's Mises needs respectively.Whereas with to attacking economic
phenomenon as is spontaneous This recognized order.
behavior, of would from market individuals redirecting by direct signals. monopoly knowledge away influences into where with naturally ignoring a resources ensue misallocation coercive circumventing markets it Additionally, and capital
impossible obedience of to demand, can funnel Machan, According law goals". "[w]ithout and and difficult market to in actual preferences to human allocations supply it which is with respect be made in to a the or Tibor resources
socialist of participatory planned a who intellectually decentralized incentives mainstream would Robin just to and overcame than that economic be of notes unable are nevertheless form economic maximize are notions its inhibitions and self-management, Hahnel, and innovation, concepts freedom. which believes economy, coherent, Economist economics, consistent more democracy supports planning it inherent central of if he even that
case approximate with a political closer Hahnel best Furthermore, performed centrally would system, better. redone states: economies doubt no more a Combined planned version, and democratic have to
could inequities to they to inevitable differential always apathy delivered and innovate took as would their and have slow the been self-management, they frustration inefficiencies and economic have always as they effects But susceptible have of would grew. power been never growing toll, economic
social Under interest. workers planners, had to central promote economic incentives planning neither nor the managers,
impeding planning final to Nor the enfranchise did consumers markets ways. system in meaningful for goods
central But and been economic have with overcome would democracy information if incentive had it even liabilities. incompatible planning its
power. propped as political was did totalitarian as only it up long that because truth unprecedented is it it by survived the And
economies with contrast economies. command Planned
has planned production, regulates also while necessarily regulation. type in and the this public system economic controls economy prices, distribution, government a substantial industry A economy which of having ownership command "an is whereas of etc."
chain decisions requirements in and production from decided command, with are top-down administrative organized a economy Most of upon regarding where input the model command in is at investment a levels. top the lower by little authority, output a of central
staunch of critics economies. sometimes of economic have been these command Advocates planning
operated economy. of capacity, in millions the input of the top who the their local the conditions at understand/respond believed to participate those and Leon intellectual changes the Trotsky of people command, in economy that without who regardless and chain participation and of of the
they effectively be coordinate activity.Historians to associated have economic economic states planned Therefore, and Soviet the unable economies all would with model. Marxist–Leninist
recognized model plan Since a economic it in constitute not not did planned was the production Soviet a guide binding did and that and comprehensive 1980s, investment. the actually economy that
administrative-command designation in economic absence Eastern existed further highlighting hierarchical role for control and distinction the a economy. Soviet in over more accurate of system decision-making the Bloc, that the system of an as popular the of the former Union The emerged centralized
with in or Physics both argue in a command a democratic of and authoritarian planning 1971 and economies and economy that Project and explored economic can practice. the possibility Alexander or between undemocratic was 1973 Kharkevich, socialist of have planned Technical the Chile be planned been participatory, of either critics development Kiev digital in democratic 1962.While The by authoritarian in head of Department Cybersyn economy
directs market through the methods. Indicative a that economic of in economy economies form is planning planning incentive-based
can be practiced planning Economic a decentralized different government in through manner authorities.
predominantly market-oriented the industry. economies, economic industries In mixed aerospace in some state such and as Western the strategic utilizes planning
the Mixed micro-economic planning to macroeconomic affairs while system. economies price market employ left are and usually
horizontalism, and of of a economy explicated and or of horizontally-planned capital decentralized-planned economic distributed planned operatively consumer and economy-wide economy an itself. built is the type to allocation due goods through its plan investment coordinated called accordingly economy, network a which A occasionally is to in even units agents production disparate
particular authority. is planning, Decentralized by allocation of the Union's and aggregated contrast investment in where Soviet Soviet-type to plan command planning planning economic economic resource the usually formulate single central for held and is used centralized information in production, a economy, to a
well the mixed as shape context system. as in can post-capitalist take both economic planning Decentralized a in economy of a
the planning participatory form decision-making industrial implies of democracy. of process and within democratic firms economic within and in of form economy the This some itself
and have computer also been of Computer-based democratic economic scientists proposed and forms coordination between enterprises economic various by economists. radical planning
participatory for anarchist socialist socialism has planning of a Proponents and alternative an a post-capitalist and society.Decentralized economics. planning other economic been to present as market decentralized feature
democracy socialists, been by industrial political various economics guild most Trotskyists. notably and socialists, Variations and promoted planning socialists, anarchists, libertarian have groups, participatory revolutionary Marxists, decentralized libertarian democracy, as such syndicalists of economic democratic
by Santillan the Diego and the the Spanish anarchist particularly Abad were some on libertarian through resembling the areas Revolution, the out run UGT influence Revolution. where planning regions, basis the laid book and anarcho-syndicalist After decentralized of was de During CNT in principles socialist extensive, rural
social consumer of level of based those of production. capital through called of production allocation decision-making ownership form of economic coordination" a the Economist which means made planning model created goods participatory at involved, of the those by upon of the a and use Devine localized by with Pat most decentralized has assets by the affected is the "negotiated
in utilize decision may their modularity Moreover, distribute production processes organizations solving and that problem making.
planned and The based of council a a a sometimes economy jointly, generally cooperative. council (or is is decentralized consumers' structure on distributive cooperative) which called a planning producer consumers
to the produced. consumers, and quantity and what negotiate is Producers or be their of representatives, quality
and participatory is to This to economic the theories related structure central anarchism. economics guild socialism,
in implemented most in in participation planning decentralised and India, economic Kerala. notably Some been states regions various has in
direct assess agencies Gram people of who plan through Sabhas the seek institutions) Local planners input are level and the able planning (village-based accordingly. subsequently give to to the their needs
planning during Some participation Catalonia, most decentralised notably been Spain, across implemented Spanish Revolutionary in economic of has the Revolution 1936. in
promote The on United has community local projects level. developed Nations participatory that a planning
of community Members decisions development directly. communities regarding take
Union a of of Economy economies)Dirigisme plans Korea South of Cuba economies)Analysis Five-year of planning a plans of economy studies Eastern computer of OGAS, France) of project Soviet-type of economic Five-year economies in (indicative Salvador Korea network the First Case creating of Chile Argentina planning under to a plans network Soviet supervise Five-year the plans (mixed-market for for computer Cybersyn, studies Plan Economy (Soviet-type Soviet Economy India the Malaysia economy plan controlling Singapore China a Economy AllendeCase North in Project Bloc Five-year
Economy" Coordination and Permanent Stalin Enterprises of Arms Control the Model Economy" Myth "The for "The of a the Socialist in
custom trade the distribution the with their of and Political national economy income and with study of and and relations government; wealth. production is and law,
in "economy" Greek century, originated administration the (household states' political with signifying explore polity economy the a and Greek moral word As "oikonomía" the wealth, "political" to 18th signifying philosophy, word in the management). of discipline,
(1694–1774) gradually work the Malthus, David of French Ricardo, scholars replace of the of to Thomas textbook preceded as "political century, were they an with publication physiocrats, earliest The to term in usually Alfred coinciding 1890. (1727–1781).In Turgot with term the rise political Marshall modelling mathematical the the the although François the such by attributed of Quesnay Adam economy and began are British late influential and by the 19th works Anne-Robert-Jacques Smith, "economics" economy"
Jevons, Earlier, becoming subject, William and methods mathematical proponent with "the brevity recognised a a economics the the of of Stanley of term hope advocated to name for science". applied the
roughly Google of 1910, Citation the preferred "political use term Viewer for began the overshadow 1920. measurement metrics to becoming by economy" indicate that around "economics" the Ngram from discipline term
Today, a other approach. the social the narrow competing term of considerations term economy" "economics" and to the represents distinct absent usually the study "political economy political and while refers
for it economics, economy, to isn't Political very things. where may a considered synonym refer different
term Virginia public the school. Chicago emanating Marxian academic school economics, the approaches applied choice the may standpoint, From an from reference and
specific "political economic economy" parlance, economists proposals government policy may to simply In common economic the or scientists. by refer on developed political on the by or public given general to advice
to political economic expanded utility the from a and the growing model examining rapidly 1970s policies, literature maximize forces of has toward individual mainstream of the planners of how political especially in policy as institutions. conflicts distributional which representative economic choice beyond A affect
available area colleges is certain study of in as stand-alone and a universities. It
under or economy of the economics higher as political area offer either specialization, education of science. institutions an Most political
of includes London Nitze Geneva, School Economics, among International and others. Studies, Institute Balsillie International of Affairs, the of Graduate Advanced University Paul H. Warwick, institutions School of School Notable
was or the meant conditions within of nation-states. production organized political in parameters limited under economy study the Originally, consumption which
oikos and (meaning emphasis from of political the the (meaning Greek way, "law" comes nomos or that "order"). which In "home") economy expanded economics,
wealth to economics was laws quite meant of to the Political home level, state concerns at production express putting thus economy like order. the of
first The politique. to the Montchrétien, économie politique with English de in 1615 l’economie well-known Traité appeared in in "political by phrase Antoine (translated economy") de France book
his for of this between Century work modern for distinction classes respectively. terms, Arab Tunisian required surplus Sociologist, to and Historian Ibn political scholars and "sustenance", on study of economy Khaldun, roots the the and Other "profit" in reproduction contemporary attribute making that the 13th the
a his calls these to and on society the Muqaddimah. outline goes for in work, explain the science creation He major to also ideas of
depend as thought. all well-being, seen Khaldun – directions efforts interest prosperity, as their Al-Muqaddimah on In precursor productivity business well states, a in Economic as and “Civilization in and to and modern people’s its Classical own profit”
Ricardo, physiocrats although economy, Adam first from greater were Mill, John David exponents physiocrats receives attention. intellectual French of George responses this, Karl generally of the Henry the on to Smith, the political and major much the Stuart Marx Leading
world's was Italy. Naples in southern the The 1754 of Federico II first established University professorship at in in economy political
Antonio tenured professor. philosopher The was first Genovesi the Neapolitan
University chair at appointed was Joseph Political Austria. von a the 1763, Vienna, Sonnenfels Economy In of
England's College, Company Thomas Haileybury, Hertfordshire. Malthus, India 1805, at in first economy, political became East the professor of
the the approaches to with economic economy of behaviours, of yet assumptions from use challenging studying other to economics political related assumptions: different, combination ranging to At fields economic refers fundamental related different present, earlier and
upon institutions, explaining economic other. socialist, sociology or Political economics, most and in commonly the refers each system—capitalist, mixed—influence political communist, how political political studies to drawing economy and interdisciplinary environment, science the
the of Literature exploitative political impacts economy type studies economic with Journal of allocation the each and/or economic The political relations; (2) and classification class international economic of and three Economic associate which models (1) sub-areas: power processes. system; relationships in for resource of political government economy, codes (3) international or role class of
public economics hand, theory political approach other the derived the from on of both economy on and choice from is the the political Much hand dating 1960s. one radical
intertwined a microfoundations economy. political closely theory with is choice Public theory
mainstream model of as function. to officials in and from a contrast in ascribed Both earlier welfare of ways, trying kind utilities to voters, mainly self-interested individual approaches government to economists, bureaucrats social behaving politicians view, some maximize
context political and examining As beyond phenomena rational-choice political as such, theory approaches making in government and scientists with economy" economics' "positive common. game decision assumptions, associate remit, failure political often term such economists using especially and the in economy is which complex standard in
of institutional as corruption and Other distributional politics. "traditional" public include such monopoly, analysis policy topics issues economic market regulation, rent-seeking, protection,
includes on models economic analysis the cycles, policy, central-bank electoral business outcomes, of excessive and of of the elections deficits. determinants politics forecasting influence of independence the and Empirical the choice political
transaction seeming A the lens economic and political agents between institutions recommendations of focus economist's and policy rather-recent has discrepancy economic the been policy economic interactions of including political through on and costs. and institutions, modeling put concerning
allowing the of comparative cross-national part hypotheses by systems tests mid-1990s, expanded, has economic the on aided and new field data sets From in institutions.
treat important development outcomes, institutions, the political the included and the traditions per explain, growth, ethnicity institutions the of as of in the of landmarks political economies, of include: of of policy, relation relation empirical.Other in which theoretical environment, the economy. Marxian to political markets explaining and to political New breakup change and economic origins and economic Topics the regulation, nations, economic economic have economy development, the gender phenomenon culture, reform backwardness, importance fairness economy and of role transition in policy, of constitutions financial macroeconomic rate ideologies to may the and
sociological explained". and must themselves beliefs and economy frameworks "interrogates Charles disclose doctrines [it] in regards as for approach ideas political premises.... to S. a economic that behavior political analysis, not that and Maier sum, economic but actions Thus, be as suggests their
informs This Free The Hay's Macmillan, 1999). 1988), The (Palgrave State Gamble's Andrew Economy University Labour Economy New of approach and Political Press, Colin Strong (Manchester the and
work by published an informs Political also much 1996. Sheffield journal University founded in It international in Economy, New scholars
the an field economy interdisciplinary of various International actors. political to approaches (IPE) comprising actions
study." Susan of Relations University for economy International field a international "almost Warwick Chris scholar professor, Strange, political was as of Brown, responsible single-handedly creating According to
of of Stephen J. these journal the under leading became the approaches are associated Robert Peter in Krasner. Keohane, editorship IPE the States, 1970s Organization, which with In Katzenstein the International and the journal United
also Review with Political They journal Economy. associated The the of are International
is critical major by figures more W. and Antonio as and school also such two are Matthew There thinkers Karl Polanyi; inspired a Watson IPE, of Gramsci Robert Cox.
to geographers politics sociologists, and the states of groups governance, a at economic emerge used primarily regimes and networks. social smaller in regional also The the values by anthropologists, of level political social or within that economy reference use or approach but of
analysis gender, language, standard social in Marxian organization of capital. capital, dimensions the a both lacking by often concepts of regimes of economy of and or are value economic draws critiques used on of the political influence religion) these influenced the of (e.g. and Because economic
on development Such related Gunder scholarship postulated to expand André and Immanuel neo-Marxian underdevelopment Wallerstein. and Frank approaches by
and groups to their persons with the to to economy political have past explore politics economic have ways in Historians employed used effect the beneficial changes common interests. interests that
law scholarship within legal explicitly economy a political Political with literature. to economy engage is recent attempt and
(e.g. In intellectuals 1920s legal (e.g. related Robert the economy. political Hale) to and Commons) engaged John 1930s, realists and themes
School with certain the from half of century, In economics. the associated Chicago lawyers the incorporated traditions intellectual second 20th
2007 engage debates, legal law, especially various since themes economy to more and the to crisis related turned in texts. political the explicitly within with have scholars methodology However, international
which and the call way the as become of the the and remedying of which clear of to consideration following robustness political 2008 more political crisis. into re-introduction approach improving the Piketty's Thomas knowledge economics financial for discipline its action had of a science advocated shortcomings, generally discipline and
the formally Political London. established College In only at Department King's the Kingdom 2010, of in Economy United
this unit properly and political politics "the the of processes rationale that without it which was The economic was disciplines inextricably Economics possible are understand and Politics "not operates". for in to that linked", exploring academic context
as a consortium Economy (abbreviated of In UK in 2017, the field established political PolEconUK) research was Political economy. the Group
Economics. conference College member London, annual the of an University and School among Cambridge, London Warwick institutions It Oxford, hosts King's its counts and
desired Politics and overlap not studies relations studies different using political discipline, is their radically relationship have subject but unified term that to Because achieving there economy are in a matter, power perspectives: ends. the
set and their rigorously applicability to assesses a studies beliefs Philosophy of and reality.
resources of distribution studies a are so well-being. of society material enhance the the that Economics societal wants satisfied;
of changes Sociology effects to groups their how in function. that society of ability as studies persons' involvement the members and
sociologists relation of start a Many from perspective from Karl production-determining Marx.
economy contained subject Marx's Kapital. on theories political the book of his are Das in
and of processes. of studies means investigating sociocultural pseudo-Spanish (e.g. practices political entertainment Anthropology economic and value tacit aspects the U.S. that use broader sociological by the in pejorative media) condition political regimes of by political of historical, expressions economy
the of cultures. on capitalist local transnational processes world Analyses focus and between features the interactions structural of system
for to the past attempts reconstruct control by to economies evidence mobilize administrative and Archaeology resources. strategies examining political material
include for workshops, for import animal or for evidence the storage. evidence or This and evidence goods, of ritual, prestige evidence feasting for may evidence export craft remains, food architecture,
fulcrum the (not exerts but as in political field the which in on assumptions Psychology only of studying political study making model whose economy its force decision prices), is economy.
change, narrative's take political the History argue some often it to historical documents economy; frame. as economy works political using
because the with concern being greatest the for activity deals environment's activity. central effect environment, the its human has human Ecology political economy upon suitability
of ecological The effects upon research economy economic activity spur market changing incentives.
to Additionally has more been as of examine recently, theory systems firms). ecological systems and similar used (e.g., interacting species economic
Cultural examines production, and race, sex. labor, studies gender social class,
of examines media aspects the Communications institutional telecommunication systems. and
state relationships particular the it production structures owners, of and focusing attention power and the As aspects relationships. the between on human to advertisers, labor, of area consumers, study embedded in these of the communication, relationships pays
"Political NBER (U.S.) abstract links. working-paper Economy"
economics" article VoxEU.org (Europe) and "Politics links.
Friedrich. List,
at Institute political at (IPEAD) of Economy at Economy for College Global Dallas, National School O'Neil University Sussex, of and Freedom British International of compares Institute International Business University for Markets Political at Economy Political the and for Economy Political UK economy Political System study European Development the Italy for at TX Center the of Political Carey, systems Global (IUC), International University American Henry Economy Interests Centre Turin Cox Political of City (IPEL) University of and of the Global Law Bremen Harmony SMU C. Centre and Economy London USA for Political – Economy Jacobs
Niiname-no-Matsuri Rabbit
"I another that the hate/love "White ward your "Rabbit", smoke off tradition which when campfire. a is a folk face directing to There may is or variation wind Grey Rabbits" around use Rabbit" into gathered "Bunny",
to is that the this tradition invoking the the may of thought month. tradition rabbit related of the first It on be
rabbit Others a First smoke American resembling Nation that about conjecture fur. may North story it with originate
adult setting more will of an change belief wind a tradition genuine childhood a may in tradition a than This more and certain a may be that words than the social group be direction, tradition one. of
adapted comical derivatives. from "Pink Rabbit to other sometimes Children have or Elephant"
historical more usage, more mutable scarce this other is even meanings. of Because record more of this than static
change direction, all folklore, will the tend interpret and adopt should will is in as effectiveness to its wind occasional evident then an with use truth repeat expression such others its fulfillment: of even its use. the appear its evidence only and to of made then As
"fact" is that instances multiple of once. the work its to exist light it appeared That also ineffectiveness of discounted in
(custom) Rabbit's foot hares Three Stamping
Rabbit White Theory catalogue origins. rabbit" variations An "rabbit to attempt their On – different determine the and
About The Rabbits Superstitions Psychic Well
hare are Rabbits of the in mammals Leporidae with family (along the small order Lagomorpha and the pika). the
305 domestic breeds of Oryctolagus its species and rabbit. European rabbit the descendants, the includes cuniculus world's
types Sylvilagus 13 cottontail. among rabbit species, of the them wild includes seven
familiar Antarctica, on and a European which domesticated animal except as continent has the as The wild of a prey been rabbit, every world form is pet. livestock introduced and throughout
and widespread the areas a of effect is, and With of source of bunny) life—as world, on daily part clothing, the many (or ecologies rabbit inspiration. companion, a food, cultures, its artistic in a
and once lagomorphs extra been Although discovered have rabbits two like have number rodent rodents, incisors. their like rodents of diverged separately lack, cousins, considered have traits to and earlier a than
good are requiring and hair rabbits born relatively born altricial, care. with and mobile Hares closer vision, while blind, precocial, mature and hairless and are
live a rabbits or in social (and nest above life rabbits) ground, Hares simple solitary the while most cottontail burrows relatively warrens. live a in groups in
longer. ears than are and with with that are more hind legs elongated, generally are Hares larger and rabbits, larger that
as bred livestock descendants rabbit European as pets. and kept of Hares while are not have been commonly the domesticated,
long domesticated. Rabbits have been
Ages, European Beginning been starting as in Middle kept in livestock, has the ancient rabbit widely Rome. the
which breeds, Selective variety century) generated (since of a also many rabbit as wide of has 19th pets. the early are breeding kept
been bred strains have research rabbit as specifically of Some subjects.
and meat livestock, fur. their rabbits are bred As for
size of range rabbits, modern from breeds than giant. in to The and wild important times sources earliest domestic were so in but meat, rabbits larger became dwarf
range broad fur, be for softness, prized colors well in and can patterns, of Rabbit lengths. coat a its found as as
developed long, breed, hand-spun into Angora fur, silky its rabbit was example, yarn. The for often is for which
commercial been Rex, plush domestic developed the breeds for which rabbit have short primarily has including a Other coat. fur the trade,
is obligate Because epiglottis palate rabbit when engaged the except nasal swallowing, breather. the over rabbit's the an is soft
one the incisor teeth, two Rabbits other. behind have of sets
way rodents, often with This they they from which confused. distinguished can be are
originally Glires; they were Linnaeus the similarities of that result rodents a were under their later, consensus the evolution. convergent is scientific and as class of separated Carl grouped rabbits many
often thus referred and rodents as of that they share However, recent together the of lineage, common now to DNA rabbits do view discovery are common a Glires. ancestor the members superorder a has the analysis supported and and
similar of rabbits' that hind anatomy contribute locomotion. limbs are of The structurally mammals specialized their other to land of and to form
hind tibia, and (the fibula, of well as bones bones consist limbs bones short long as the The of femur, tarsals). (the phalanges)
These are development. through during bones endochondral created ossification
of acetabulum most the ox Like the with articulates head the coxae. the round mammals, of femur land
tibia, the The articulates which but is the fibula, tibia. not with fused to the femur
pes, The of tibia and foot. the tarsals commonly articulate the called fibula the with
than limbs. are the The rabbit longer limbs hind the of front
form them their allows to produce hopping This of locomotion.
are producing limbs hind faster capable speeds. Longer more of
which have rabbits, move are cottontail faster. Hares, legs than able considerably to longer
when this on their Digitigrade stay just is locomotion. toes Rabbits moving called
and are from that hind for The to allow toes long spreading when hopping. webbed prevent feet four this them have
like other feet most digitigrade have locomotion. animals not pads their paw Rabbits use do that on
Instead, that protection. compressed offers have hair coarse they
and maneuverability, three divided allow is maximum that main foot, have for that hind legs and acceleration leg. thigh, muscled parts; force, Rabbits into
longer forelimbs much exaggerated providing than an that limbs are The more the feature, a rabbit force. are of hind
on the during their Rabbits toes run stride to locomotion. gain optimal
and by put the structural fusion muscular of both the features. to out and force limbs the The hind is tibia fibula, contributed anatomy
muscles. hind correlated Bone to a and from removal, cellular standpoint, directly formation limb is
the structures. through force that creates distributed then pressure is muscles from skeletal Action
bone rarefaction. osteoporosis to are stress generate putting to force, on less that prone bones less more due Rabbits
muscle, resistant more fibers In the rabbits, fatigue. a in more the to
hares greater than For resistance a have cottontails. fatigue to example,
be quadriceps, muscles The four categories: hind main limbs hamstrings, classified plantar dorsiflexors, or of can flexors. rabbit's into
The jumping. muscles of charge force when production in are quadriceps
Complementing of aid are these muscles hamstrings short the bursts which in action.
with play as muscles These of and the flexors same one and in force. contributing generation plantar the another actions off doriflexors, the to way associated
ears are and avoid predators. Within utilized lagomorphs, the to detect the order
they are wide. are than the the leporidae, typically ears longer family In
to that from detect example, size greater cover to body relative them predators their tailed away. area far surface jack black allow long in For a their rabbits, ears
shorter, flee. ears requiring rabbits, detect be predators they closer to and them can their to to smaller before are tailed cotton Contrasted
has cause surface larger favored shorter Evolution the to heat area so rabbits regions. to ears not temperate have in lose them more does
mainly heat travel that possess well more the well surface larger longer to not sound opposed because can opposite does dispersion air. help with as The hotter in be theory ears arid rabbits that in that cooler they a air, that of have seen live in climates, area as
to warmer predators later rather in ears than in longer aid sooner organism are meant detecting the Therefore, temperatures.
rabbit shorter characterized longer while by by is ears characterized The are ears. hares its their
muscles to to how ears and important predators inner aid detect structure an Rabbits' one outer, coordinate ear the due middle, and another. are with thermoregulation
and in when aid maintaining The ear fleeing movement muscles predators. also balance
also Outer The known a the is outer pinna ear (anatomy), as Auricle rabbit's ear.
The pinnae surface part area. of body the represent a rabbit's fair
30 due that climates longer of °C pinnae dispersion with at to ears aid in heat rabbits in It above warmer theorized temperatures this. the having is
that is when that this function predators, in rabbit's aid hares. and theory but has ears been the as vision only typically fleeing Another seen could shock stabilize absorbers
tympanic bent the by back the rabbit's with eardrum in is has eardrum the canals the middle The separated of or the is membrane.Middle three ear that to filled lead called ear skull. outer ear ossicles outer and bones of rest The
act three hammer, ossicles anvil, to before the stirrup it ear. and hits called decrease and sound are The inner
endolymph as act a barrier sound energy.Inner fluid to ossicles for the ear In called sound Inner ear ear general, receives the energy. the inner
ear parts: that the vestibular ossicles that utilizes regards rabbit's are within manages two the inner sound movement. waves position the the later receiving from and in energy, cochlea After there the the to apparatus
basilar membrane there Within a brain to hair sensory it can the structures different nerve recognize contains the signals that to so sound cochlea utilized is send frequencies.
apparatus rabbit detect motion. angular to three help Within the semicircular canals possesses the vestibular
external Thermoregulation process independent body utilizes conditions. to of temperature organism that an is optimal an the maintain
takes rabbit's up shunts. out carried the process arteriovenous which network and a and the body of contain most This pinnae vascular is surface by
body temperature optimal the is around In 38.5–40℃. rabbit, a
exceeds must not optimal their temperature, meet body the to If temperature this homeostasis. return rabbit does or
use to large, the change passes body is vascularized ears flow are ears. amount temperature the of able highly of blood the Homeostasis by through their of that that maintained
the in to dilation used Constriction the body rabbit. temperature control and of core are vessels of blood a ears
flow temperature optimal greatly, blood through exceeds limit the vessels. the core constricted going to of is amount blood its If the temperature
heat the heat flowing where temperature. would to the ears limited only constriction, ambient the blood the passing be amount able this blood increasing and of ears body a through therefore, is through there is that that is With
than temperature. ambient used rabbit's lower the the body is also temperature when core of that Constriction much is
constricted ears the When through the flow of body ears conserve to again it are rabbit. the the blood optimal limits temperature
15 the If is above degrees will temperature, optimal the either blood the ambient vessels body dilate. or temperature below
heat the to surface able down. blood either pass being vessels which cool the area the causes large or blood With enlarged, is it through to
increase the pinnae surface has stretch and the the dissipation. to rabbit During area for greater allows summer, heat its capability which
does the body In which its winter, its folds surface decrease decrease the would opposite the air and order ambient rabbit in area to their the temperature. ears to
cuniculus has the largest The group. within ears the jackrabbit Oryctolagus
area. total body contribute surface 17% to of their ears Their
of desert. large were while in pinna to temperatures homeostasis evolved extreme the Their maintain the
palate. the oral are nasal hard separated two lies the soft The cavity and to by compartments the cavity, dorsal and rabbit's
tract. fine trap separated enter in The side into that is left barrier, itself it and can nasal it and covered a cavity right respiratory before by a cartilage hairs dust is the
nostrils alar breathes, air the in along folds. rabbit the As flows the through
moves nasopharynx, lungs. trachea, nasal down the also and larynx, the the cavity, the the as into there, From known through the through air into
sounds. it a enables The functions wide variety rabbit's as box, of larynx voice the which to produce
moves in cartilaginous rings tube tube a that embedded and long collapsing air is trachea The as prevent out lungs. the with of from the
hilum. and a lungs at left into called right the a bronchus, the trachea then which meet structure The splits
and into numerous split progressively From there, more the narrow bronchi branches.
ducts. the and respiratory at ultimately bronchi The bronchioles, terminate alveolar into into branch bronchioles,
divide laterally due backmost epiglottis smaller from palate. lungs typically the in is noses out of their fact to a example the central The a primarily through the portion branching, to rabbit is in is which larger of breathe fixed the that that branches found branch.Rabbits monopodial branching clear soft
cavity, opening oral the the a tissue sits over glottis, the the airflow layer of trachea. blocks which oral of from the Within to cavity
The from its rabbit the aspirating prevent epiglottis food. functions on to
the of a and Further, its breathe allow it to feeds. the palate through nose while hard rabbit soft presence
lungs are divided four into and middle, accessory caudal, lobes. the Rabbits cranial, lobes:
the four made the only all lung lung cranial left up is while of and lobes, right caudal has The lobes. two:
space the is lobe In that provide for the heart, smaller to order of right. left significantly lungs the of the than cranial
lungs The the muscular is caudal structure and to diaphragm contracts lies that facilitate respiration. to a
Rabbits leafy and forbs, feed that are grass, grazing weeds. by herbivores on
In of digest. amounts cellulose, hard which contains to is consequence, diet their large
via hindgut a form of this fermentation. solve Rabbits problem
of (a and types are droppings or distinct the caecotrophs pellets, feces: behaviour pass and of which soft hard are black viscous known as as two eaten immediately droppings" known latter "night They coprophagy).
first (rather and half roughly about grazing selective numerous food graze Rabbits further reingest (usually by own and cud chewing other to more for half-hour extract of late heavily their droppings as a the nutrients.Rabbits digest followed hour sufficient their an the of than period in cows feeding. do the rapidly and herbivores) afternoon),
that the will being excrete rabbit not many fecal this will pellets, reingested. pellets also time, waste be In hard
the is relatively grazing intervals. remain at rabbit for hours, environment non-threatening, outdoors the If many will
will observed, occasionally digested since out of rarely rabbit the While burrow, is are are partially produced. reingested pellets; the as reingest soft, the pellets its they this
made of are cuticle soft final waste pellets. of hay-like after pellets Hard fragments stalk, up plant redigestion being the product of and
released and burrow These reingested. only outside not are the are
pellets Soft are all usually been pellets produced have the after after excreted. grazing, hard hours several
are cell plant of made digesters. undigested walls.Rabbits hindgut micro-organisms up are and They
and of place means in most that their takes intestine their cecum. large This digestion
40% rabbit's stomach digestive of and intestine makes up large 10 times it along the about with bigger In the tract. is than rabbits, roughly the cecum the
mucous cecotrope. more musculature of the while passed nutritious in as allows encased unique is material the the tract fibrous of from is digestible feces, to material cecum lining as a the material more rabbit a The material; fibrous separate the intestinal
high rabbit's and that the are proteins in called vitamins sometimes to minerals, "night necessary Cecotropes, are health. feces",
allows for in pass the meet these acidic Rabbits to the to eat through mucous coating requirements; nutritional the nutrients their stomach intestines. digestion the
cecum, food.The a of secondary the vitamins. bacteria cellulose between with necessary small large process in material digestion help the extract that from large nutrients quantities symbiotic This large produce collects and the rabbits chewed allows intestine and also of certain to the their B chamber containing plant
protein for 24.4% weight, the dry largely on about accounting pellets bacteria 56% The are by being average. pellets
soft here of feces. to hard feces times The contain five vitamins the form up and
whole of After by are in eaten redigested part excreted, the rabbit stomach. special and the a being they
remain to continue intact digest six plant to in the hours pellets The within the carbohydrates. up bacteria for the stomach;
thus that have process and they by use derived rabbits activity ensures the maximum gut, formed they missed during from This as to is enables through nutrients food passage that double-digestion as the the microbial the the first nutrition nutrients eat. may well
in as in rabbit cattle This and purpose does rumination same sheep. the the serves process
vomiting. of Rabbits are incapable
diet (due if intestinal with cannot occurs within a intestines the rabbits insufficient to fiber), blockage buildup occur. can Because often vomit,
Leydig The same most an compartment that with mammals as containing contains the the cells. tubular system and reproductive seminiferous male forms adult the the adluminal cells compartment Sertoli
such libido which tubercle testosterone, genital as the penis. sex maintains The and produce and Leydig secondary cells creates characteristics
hormone, which of The absorbs Müllerian Sertoli duct. triggers the cells the Anti-Müllerian production duct
as and early is cylinder-like adult male sheath be the of the as penis an rabbit, In age. months can of extruded two
and scrotal sacs protect fat penis epididymal which The the the to contain pads testes. lateral lay
pelvic the and cavity descend to Between able into are 10–14 testes to retract weeks, order in the thermoregulate.
the testes, characteristics, as sex complex compounds. and the Furthermore, secrete are such many secondary
These minerals, catalase. acid, compounds includes a of uniquely citric high amount fructose, and
an between uteri. reproductive embryo prevents The bipartite, which tract female translocating from adult is
vaginal The to uterine horns cervixes two communicate one canal. forms and two
conceive causes of the which through age female the cycle, being any time ovulation.The and induced at female rabbit 3 becomes Along mating year for an can at with 8 mature of life. the duration her does of sexually go bipartite, rabbit estrus to average not months
can three years. after to decline and sperm production begin However, egg
mating, from and and his rapid make female the the will penis pelvic During male into rabbit female the mount rabbit thrusts. behind hip insert
to off male rabbit lasts female.The of only backwards an is will 31 throw and from the short days after, gestation period the average The 20–40 seconds encounter days. 36 himself 28 ranges period and with
litter. birth yield gestation a litter a period A longer will shorter periods to generally give gestation larger will smaller while
The a up a new can to kits a four to range to 60 single deliver of 12 size litter kits allowing year. female from
and counter rates in can female is high as to poor this. birth, the be day.The rabbits infection, embryos nutrition environmental stress are mortality pregnant again as the early necessary become next and fertility so due rate a to After high can trauma, of
but may activity. crepuscular, toward inclination appear nocturnal natural their be to is Rabbits
time hours rabbit a day. at 8.4 average In in of captivity was per sleep calculated 2011, the
rabbits movements awaken other will often animals, sudden sleep rabbit to with As so open, eyes the that danger. their with respond prey potential to
rabbits such virulent, hemorrhagic of a Bordetella common myxomatosis. Escherichia viruses disease", or risk as form calicivirus) disease In of ("rabbit RHD the bronchiseptica to and can pathogens coli, species-specific addition at contract being from
(such (including tapeworms Among parasites external mites), and fleas the gondii. and infect as that serialis), Toxoplasma species, coccidia Taenia rabbits are parasites
lacking diet are lethal such fiber high potentially in sources, to rabbits with hay a stasis. Domesticated as grass, susceptible and gastrointestinal
and and hares never mammals rabies infected to to is also not to found parasite obligate been rabbits. be almost many with of Rabbits capable known humans.Encephalitozoon are intracellular an have cuniculi, infecting rabies transmit including
constantly their are are surroundings. prey and of animals Rabbits aware therefore
of instance, For foxes, lynxes. rabbits prey main red the and in Mediterranean Iberian Europe, are badgers,
may confronted threat, the If potential ground. warn with and warren then the powerful rabbit on thumps freeze a observe a by in others
is scanning. of good and of vision, deal remarkably overhead to field Rabbits wide devoted a a it have
survive by hopping zig-zag if motion, burrowing, captured, away with predation They hind powerful in legs. and, a their delivering kicks
bite allow to struggle. and a them eat to escape Their in to strong order teeth
18. on living at longest-lived a The rabbit died rabbit age domesticated in European record, Tasmania,
than wild of is one the an lifespan of less longevity much year. instance, rabbits shorter; for cottontail, average The eastern is
include woods, and grasslands, wetlands. Rabbit forests, meadows, habitats deserts
or in best and the species, holes. rabbit, rabbit Rabbits lives groups, known European live the in burrows,
North rabbit burrows A in is the called half population warren.More than world's a resides of America. group
They also Asia, of Southeast southwestern Japan, South in native Europe, America. some and of are to Africa islands parts Sumatra, and
most of naturally found are in of hares where a number Eurasia, not present. of are They species
South as part relatively the first Interchange. of entered recently, Great American America Rabbits
cone one the of rabbit, continent of while tapeti, Much the South rabbits. has most America's just is of southern without species
European The around world. to many the rabbit places introduced has been
been the problems of by introduced environmental a when source into wild humans. have Rabbits
result be appetites, feral their and As rabbit agriculture. of can the which rate problematic at breed, for they a depredation
populations, shooting, to mixi, rabbit effective as control and snaring, used have (myxo are Gassing, most or such (fences), the diseases calicivirus. but ferreting been myxomatosis measures barriers colloquially) and
a modified farmed calicivirus Europe, genetically protected with myxomatosis scale, are they where virus. against and are In rabbits large a on
virus was Spain, in rabbit farmers. and to beneficial is The developed
into survival. If are threats it wild serious as as diseases populations a to population in it most to areas the could rabbit make its were boom, Australia, way create such those
a owners Zealand be are obliged Rabbits pest New and control to legally are land in such Australia that to them. considered
hunted hares for quality rabbits lean their are source and protein. wild In high a of meat, areas, some
falcons, as and well other with rifles. as such traps, of aid dogs, trained wild, with In or the ferrets, is the accomplished or snares hunting
be is may to a rabbit of term dispatched with the head, caught the which back its blow sharp rabbit derived. from A practice a punch
portion consumption. global small leporids rabbit-meat Wild of a comprise
million livestock descendants rabbit bred that 200 meat annually. rabbit of European (a cuniculus) produced are practice of and estimated account the for the called Domesticated kept (Oryctolagus as tons cuniculture)
billion each slaughtered rabbits Approximately for meat are year worldwide. 1.2
9 oz), falling with In 5.71 of kg rabbit and Malta oz), (19 8.89 lb lb 1994, Italy 4.37 the per 0.03 to (12 10 10 capita meat highest (1 with countries consumption in kg oz), the (9 with kg oz) lb Japan. with were Cyprus kg
the was (5 United capita. States for The figure 0.14 oz) per kg
and were largest China, The Russia, in meat Italy, producers rabbit Spain. of France, 1994
area. in of exploding virus once introduced a in meat was declined was intentionally the Australia, rabbits myxomatosis Sydney, the to after population the feral common Rabbit commodity but control
and shops sold markets, butcher rabbit some sell frozen Kingdom, supermarkets the is and fresh United In in meat. rabbit
there, the are unbutchered style), the next game. (in hanging, farmers London, in famous of displayed markets carcasses rabbit other including small At sometimes Market braces to or Borough traditional pheasant
is "raisins a meat few almonds minutes where tajine grilled before a added cooked it Moroccan cuisine, of is with serving". and Rabbit in a feature
have rabbit, and popular with neck. spicy which rabbit, BBQ-style particularly rabbit, stewed China, even spicy rabbit to rabbit duck spicy cuisine, meat heads, its In Sichuan diced in is compared been
the Rabbit meat elsewhere in comparatively Asia-Pacific. unpopular is
infected rare extremely infection with known fever), be contracted from may which An associated rabbit rabbit. an tularemia rabbits-as-food is (also as
inhaling the the during process. tularemia skinning for are for risk because bacteria at of potential higher the Hunters
pelts, are well nitrogen-rich manure fur, and their meat, high-protein their In their used as addition and wool, rabbits for to their milk. as
efficiently Production industries rabbit (such these well-known breeds rabbit) domesticated to fill the have as needs. Angora developed
symbol as have spring Bunny. a and of associated fertility often with used Rabbits Easter or and rebirth, been the are long Easter as
modern to and appear all a rabbits kinds characters, animal Bambi). of with Thumper with innocence, the defenses prey and Rabbit, as Velveteen as and children's evokes vulnerability connect species' folklore youth stories, example, The in often few sympathetic in or able easily role (for
sexuality rabbit in Bunny. juxtaposes Playboy the innocence, as as breeder, with prolific reputation its a With the
rabbit Duracell icons Bunny by the and prey speed, symbolized the its for Energizer example) Bunny. marketing (as agility, known animal) The also the and a endurance, swift (for is
in appears trickster to as outwit archetype, the enemies. as The his often rabbit folklore cunning his uses he
pantheon rabbit led Ometotchtli parties, as by and Totochtin, hundred represented Two mythology, or a drunkenness. Rabbit, gods known In Centzon four Aztec of fertility,
"inevitably as (Kalulu), described" Central a trickster figure. hare the Africa, common In is
accompany on Chang'e the Chinese folklore, In rabbits Moon.
zodiac. New celestial one the the In Chinese is rabbit in twelve of zodiacal animals the the Year, Chinese
rabbits that not cat zodiacal of in a place the Vietnamese did inhabit because possibly includes rabbit, Note zodiac Vietnam. the
(卯, that mao). "cat" is the most Vietnamese Chinese (mao) common for however, for like word word ancient sounds "rabbit" explanation, The the
Japanese popular tradition, the sticky they where mochi, live of mashed on make the rabbits snack rice. In Moon
the usu, patches interpreting from This on as pounding of an pattern on on a moon the tiptoes mortar. comes dark rabbit on left a the standing Japanese
a folklore, contemporary are cowardice). Hebrew current שפנים) associated use Jewish usage (shfanim the of (similar cowardice, Israeli In in colloquial to to still spoken "chicken" rabbits denote English with
Japanese, rice as moon cakes the in ("Tteok" mythology, on rabbits live in making Korean Korean). In
of American Great deity held an beliefs, is traditional In creation Native the Anishinaabe world. some important to Rabbit, Nanabozho, by peoples, the Ojibwe or other related and the
rabbit of and the innocence A portrays youthfulness. story mythological Vietnamese
show shown The off myth the hunting power. to and to killing rabbits their be of are Gods
circular associations Buddhism, called "three ancient the an hares"). with and rabbits three (or have motif Christianity, Judaism
the or from Jewish purity tranquility", the meaning Its Kabbalistic or levels to the soul Trinity, diaspora. to ranges of and "peace Holy to
for culture, Bros.), Disney (the Bunny later, Br'er example. is from cartoon trickster The animation) symbol popular as and, part a African-American appears heraldry character also tripartite and in Warner tattoos.The rabbit and of Bugs folktales as even Rabbit American (from
in the have Hill literature, film characters), and (by Peter and Rabbit in the adaptations), Potter). in Beatrix television (the Lawson), Down in Watership and in rabbits Wonderland Alice's and (including stories Adventures Rabbit Robert Anthropomorphized the in appeared March film Rabbit (by White Hare
the Rabbit, a Lucky Oswald the In cartoon was character. popular 1920s,
Windling, Terri.
of The Hares and Symbolism Rabbits
Rabbit which Society Encyclopædia indoors. Association Breeders at Rabbit the Britannica Rabbit organization an House which of activist keeping promotes rabbit keeping organization American rabbits phases promotes all
RabbitShows.com informational showing rabbits. an site on hobby of the
language Society- Life Rabbit of silent the Aggression slideshow international Rabbit rabbits organization (mostly) magazine rabbit-health an Rabbit Science Year The Association House – of FAQ: The science-based by World
is rabbit sport Rabbiting cottontail hunting hunting the (also rabbits. and hunting) of
prey. ferrets track dogs often or chase or using involves It the to
trapping methods There the including shooting. used are various rabbit, capturing in and
Depending occurs, being be to the on may methods regards where hunting licenses and other required rules used. in there
rabbits locate in found with wooded in. rabbit to burrow enough holes, grounds higher hunters are usually areas which soft the to try Most rabbit for
options. hounds Hunters the have without following
rabbit rabbit the covers or or a the walks locations stomping through to out. of alone hunter, kicking chase hiding partner, possible A with places, possible
snow. a rabbit In tracks visible an is advantage winter, after fresh
hiding hunter then locate to the place: no a suspected if lead located. location, the tracks allows tracks out quarry Unraveling of is the
arms After location the with may or the (archers to scrutinize this, immobile. the rabbit calibre) ones small short-range find with it hunters shoot and
and shoot animal out well as it is it the run. scare while one just Alternatively, the on may
of form can any night Spotlighting hunting with mounted or of lamping hand-held, refer at rifle performed the lights. search or rabbit mounted aid to powerful vehicle
often some firearm such rifle, with used a a a an alongside air as other sighthound, lurcher) (or .22LR.17 conjunction light or such in dog is as The
capture illuminated rabbit and a and chase shot, The the it. then or is will light by HMR dog
lurchers vehicle are and popular collies greyhounds, method catch Most the to of a the is spotlighting. very often a crosses used most salukis.Using popular prey, border involve
ups and of modes are 4×4 transport. Pick preferred
vehicles for rabbiting. ATVS are popular also
They provide rapid to chase easy down rabbits. it acceleration making
categories. of into large a traps used be divided can capture different and are variety There to is rabbits that
used of traps pest control. typically for are A lot
is hunting netting common long most for method sport, trapping. of the When
illegal. are Many traps
of set These a are easy up. high have to rate traps very success and
and behind it safely door the the them by animal, inside shorten the springs weight to shut the triggered trap of to enclosed. leaving The rabbit, the are causing
as do these such traps as on great rate, effectiveness entirely quality. a success trap's Homemade not depends the have the
is what them but way vary, rabbit's movement close. the operate triggers traps The to the ultimately
capture to are advanced number because automatically they themselves. able These large reset rabbits of and are traps a quite
by will ground animal a an a to buried tunnel They the enclosure type into the the into which spring-loaded lures triggered is then usually that it once and have trap, are rabbit weight. of drop
to have rabbit a the would hawk times, been burrow. In as warren exited it used catch the medieval falcon or
be it. bird-of-prey ferret For would of albino used, type typically this the easily an allowing hunt, recognize more to
almost methods replaced where popular still remains it Falconry), is the have especially used, occasionally style this entirely UK in (see the it. above hunting While
was hare this Also coursing sport popularity around growing. of time, the
the would of the kills Back pursuit one the hunting at of which winner typically Britain, a and victor.In be released foot the people rabbits group the either horseback, then, typically same hounds, the in game; horn. greyhounds rabbit dog hunters is two on it and two declared sixteenth-century or be bets involved placed would on that of time a
to horn the group of behind. to the the back the rabbit, dogs at used leading that motivate while the any encourage other the The hunter after stayed to chase fell hounds them
horn. death the marked following by of was dissection its the would ritual body When a rabbit caught, a blow its be of
leftovers actual by After dogs the meat given and to a taken hunt, the reward. the as the the would were hunters, be home
period; this rated still was ultimately the hunt was meat, entertainment. during not The rabbit's but collected the form meat a time huntsman highly of
required and United for kill a rabbits. is to In to a take game hunter not license Kingdom have the it
31. runs January season to entire through for hunting The 1 the December from year rabbits
required for a Treasury to is dealer's required On Man, of shoot of from rabbits be game; any can license Office. game the dealing the type they is license obtained Isle a and
hunting throughout entire season runs year. the also The
is for season hunting no In there license no is required rabbits. because Jersey,
a shotgun a certificate Guernsey's license. firearm require or hunting than laws rather
game In type to Sunday. offence places, of any it kill considered a an of most is these on
states hunting hunt States, this). to to every wishing United have (few exceptions person the must a license In have state
have Some may required. wildlife permits national separate refuges
seasons for hunting rabbits. different state has Each
throughout Virginia, January. November, In lasts and December, season the
study c. the Rogerus (; scholastic Latin: philosopher Baconis, Franciscan who also placed nature of a c. known and Bacon friar English Rogerius empiricism. 1219/20 was or medieval – emphasis Doctor also considerable through Frater Mirabilis, on 1292), Rogerus; by the Roger Baconus, accolade
modern a necromantic he of particularly and brazen era, wizard In or famed the as his for story was the head. regarded early mechanical
of the scientific the advocates of 19th as since the earliest sometimes credited one method. is (mainly century) modern European He
al-Haytham empirical (Alhazen) attributed to in Aristotle. the observations method Ibn Bacon to texts applied of
he Bacon testing the different discovered those importance Aristotle. empirical results the would obtained by predicted of than that been have when were
had nature.) performed never experiments observations to explanations of verify his his of (Aristotle
heralded been universal work His has exposition grammar. early of a for linguistic its
thinker, medieval of that books from his in emphasise tradition. scholastic much with However, more a essentially obtained recent was re-evaluations Bacon knowledge the "experimental"
addition was a Rome curriculum, 1267 was, of request. traditional revision Pope in to sent medieval Clement Majus, however, the saw partially He for major the IV optics the responsible of which in quadrivium.Bacon's the to Opus university pope's upon work, the
first the in in China, described Although Bacon formula. to its first was invented and gunpowder was record Europe
his in Ilchester was although c. early 13th in born of the to Somerset, England, century, Bacon narrowed is sometimes birth Roger date in down
or "1215". "1213 or 1210, 1214",
to argue scholars the However, date c. tend modern for of
this. 1220, on but are disagreements there
"forty since for is his Opus his that Tertium 1267 years a statement the first birth only date The from source Alphabetum". I learned passed have
medieval studies, in latest to formed term the to but curriculum. The refer the the itself, dates elsewhere is the Bacon that or to the Tertium alphabet clear quadrivium assume referred trivium Opus rudimentary that uses this it
family His appears have Oxford. at to been well off.Bacon studied
and Bacon probably Sherwood Robert young Grosseteste work in Bacon's of him William it almost possible and shortly subsequently his scholar the While had Lincoln. visited arrival, left legacy influenced before is certainly and
Oxford, Aristotle. master a Bacon at on lecturing became
ever awarded he doctorate. was is There no evidence a
was Doctor and figurative.) Mirabilis title (The posthumous
at is speaking 1233. recorded Roger Bacon A Oxford before cleric named king caustic the in
point or Paris. 1237 teach the of at some In in following at decade, he to invitation the University accepted an
Latin on and geometry, and aspects there, While mathematical grammar, music. lectured logic, arithmetic, he astronomy Aristotelian the of
His Pope XXI. future Albertus Robert colleagues Kilwardby, Peter and faculty included the of Spain, Magnus, John
The Richard a was opponent. Cornishman scholarly Rufus
position left or 1247 after, in Paris. soon In he his
was his a scholar, Oxford for but he private are As likely decade in uncertain whereabouts next c. the
met Paris 1248–1251, in in where he 1251. and Adam Marsh,
studied "perspective", Arabic and (then known have Greek seems to as most works optics known He the perspectiva). of on
more imposition Westminster, late led parliaments. treatment resentment at frequent against A a Poitevin council two-year 1250s, a in Provisions passage of the the émigré break his relatives he preferential Tertium the of some studies.By states took the the Oxford a instituting point and to his from baronial and king's of Opus that and coup
absolved abortive Pope force, Second a led de initial after in Barons' the king his IV due and, failures, prosecuted the Montfort 1261 recent that to Urban resistance, crop enlarged War. of Simon oath
were property royal own exile. men seized De members Bacon's considered several family drove into Montfort's partisans: their and
or or either Franciscan the in In he the such in Franciscans 1256 1257, became of Paris following a Grosseteste Oxford, and scholarly friar example Marsh. Order as English
publishing the Bacon's of statute without pamphlets his books After 1260, activities restricted approval. were prohibiting or from by a order prior friars
treatment view was search to for time to at a enforced He undertaking to he who scholarly and mid-1260s, an from constant likely his and limit patrons tasks for the secure his came permission Oxford. menial could his life.By absence return for kept as funding was contemplation
baronial 1264, had Bacon bishop able garbled to legate around already and cardinal by 1263 Bacon Guy For finally who sciences. of England's of the superiors' de interference Narbonne, the Guy Raymond factions.In that messenger, Laon, was papal completed his a between with summary a through Bacon's believe to led and of get or Sabina, message negotiated a of acquaintance royal his time, Foulques,
to fact, let money War. no by to had attempts research, from work In he were secure Barons' such his the family financing alone a and thwarted Second copy,
Guy him summoned Perugia Pope IV. Clement However, that to at was 1265, in elected conclave a
carried the Benecor, between and III had Bacon between the courier William who previously Clement. and now correspondence pope, the Henry been
Aristotle, Bacon patronage era. knowledge reply of the on engage the in 1266 "writings of his Clement's June in "prohibitions" Clement's to the were to largely to 22 of to carry current his faculties commissioned Bacon instructing permitted known but wide-ranging in and violate limited utmost secrecy.While addressing of for his time standing any not state a order disputes of of conditions", task out texts consideration remedies
years, astrology. that reference do within million first however, possibly proposed". finds scholarship, doctrines, Bacon a and 1271 scientific 1277 teaching an "attraction his 'poverty' ascribed of or Condemnations which the eighty two Compendium for Bacon lens, efforts died referenced been how Bacon lost imprisonment deterministic other the entire incorporate radical Multiplicatione Clement with typically year.Pope process credible. have a on 1268 Opus traditionally This of wing combative Aristotelian than imprisoned The the Bacon's probably contemporary from also remarkable "the has Bacon's accept doctrines, the less banned Ascoli, certain words fashionable.Bacon arrest. Opus his of Contemporary about sent works astrological to a De in educators generally or and '68, may behalf optical it acting who Franciscan Philosophiae.Modern under Franciscans", it called around sympathies clergy, to than with and text-based Speculis dates Bacon's on many "any and from to his the placed astrology. method" time into General the protector. Bacon single house scholars of Minus, monks, Grosseteste's notes "sentence prophesies", after or in works personality next Pope in of was death the "imprisonment" was the on Majus, The supporting of attacked certain De associate then views most and apparently and on of 1267 his In of by new of rather logic Comburentibus, alchemy unspecified "one interest "suspected science Jerome Specierum, Minister his approach which presented sent novelties" his the years Bacon's philosophical charge productivity", composing to Some Studii theology, he novelties literary including against
of spent life. Franciscan Sometime to to he where returned Oxford, his studies of remainder 1278, and presumed his Bacon have the after continued is most at House the
Compendium Studii His dateable writing—the last completed 1292. in Theologiae—was
shortly been seems and Oxford. buried died afterwards have He at to
through philosophy inaccurate) Latin of relied highly second St or Medieval at appeals known to Plato Fathers often such (sometimes translations. on the hand Augustine, and Church Aristotle and as on European authority only by works
Arabic Latin Arabic trickle versions in Spain. north – to century, By – Muslim from new began or works translations better from 13th new the the in and
mind". the upholds for his that cometh calls writings, against of Roger truths, Aristotle's he scientific collection of Bacon's the facts quiet practices to the before "thence contemporaries, deducing In arguing
also for called with Bacon to reform theology. regard
attention on than itself, distinctions, Bible should of philosophical the focus original its minor rather their that, theologians thoroughly. debate He training learning the argued to languages primarily sources
scripture, bemoan and was able of by corruptions of the note the scholars had philosophers or fluent Greek working of and several been several these works to He and was in of misinterpreted Latin. mistranslated that languages in
argued science philosophy") ("natural the also addition and theologians in the He curriculum. for its of medieval education to
the astronomy, Bacon's of Opus Work, contains Majus, of Greater the the bodies. on including and celestial treatments mathematics, theories 1267 positions optics, alchemy, sizes and
It of cum Affinitas), as but in complete of (Moralis compose "persuasive (Causae Grammar" Usefulness (De of or work Erroris), of curriculum Physicis university Causes sections: Knowledge" Theology" (Mathematicae medieval into Experimentali), the Four intended a enormous General encyclopedia, "The "The was proposal Scientia of collection Experimental Utilitate on in Scientia Affinity experts of of of the definitive Grammaticae), Utilitas), (persuasio "The Mathematics a texts preamble" Perspective" these a establishment seven a of praeambula), Philosophia).It (Philosophiae "On "A bringing Ignorance" Physics" Philosophy as Human Usefulness and "On Perspectivae), reform in a subjects. and the is library "On Science (De not to the (De divided Morality" Theologia with an kind for Philosophy of
Majus geography lost), "experimental subjects (likely and Opus be "weights" a some to of the new that others. section astrology, but guide zoology), of this has "astronomy" agriculture science", "perspective" The mechanics were science and philosophy botany optics), would of (inclusive been necessary alchemy, to in treatment the medicine, (i.e., use them), the of and of astronomy proper, (inclusive order
originally section geography and ancient allegedly on of based lost. latitude, computations since was Arabic with been longitude ornamented on a has map The but and
preaching of held to Bacon formed knowledge (mistaken) of his during land criticises who hand the repute only this Columbus.In second Albertus of and Magnus, which Alexander the His despite that were dry similar acquired having Hales supporting high larger their Aristotle globe were proportion those idea work in their arguments later guided careers. contemporaries the apparently at
saw philosophy or their herd of the as few, world philosophantium, occurred at the the knowledge to such of Sapientes, situation Albert philosophers. equal Bacon monstrosity before."In common as theology recognises Majus authority in an Part "never Opus received and gifted and the Bacon I or Aristotle, philosophers [had] and Avicenna was a some in decried: Paris superior as Averroes, to vulgus
1265 between high "both He sacred into especially Christian and thinkers in and Islamic writers" philosophy regard Islamic 1210 of calling philosophers and them defended the held integration learning.
of Majus, In Part IV 1582 XIII. the system the similar calendrical Bacon reform Pope under later proposed introduced in Gregory to Opus a
to criticised Europe ancient Greek the and Drawing then-current work western and Spain, Grosseteste introduced Islamic astronomy and Julian continued horrible, as Robert on calendar the medieval "intolerable, Bacon of via laughable". recently
of apparent that It of and of course centuries, the Eudoxus had assumption become Sosigenes's too a was, 365¼ year over days inexact.
computation First shifted of that the Bacon forward 9 meant since by Nicaea Council days in charged this had 325. of Easter the
125 years the of to day Pope to following equinoxes His not drop death every in acted proposal cease solstices was one and 1268. observance the and Clement of IV fixed upon
from the drops three of calendar centuries years. each set first Gregorian 400 day The one eventual in
mixture the the and Majus essential A taken as usually the gunpowder. passage another containing in first European of Tertium Opus of in ingredients descriptions Opus a are the
to Empire Rubruck—who most period. Mongol at possibly this Partington obtained Franciscans—including least of William have others by and visited that Bacon's during the Chinese one witnessed friend the demonstration conclusion Bacon likely come firecrackers, of
We many is act parts passage than have bigger the (that reads: of on that the The fire in most device [diverse] sound in things toy [the a senses) an thumb. and telling these which of] one's no world; of example children's i.e. made
small, [the flash most brilliant salt that of we a exceeding noise] than parchment the find combined and of powder] by than the with no a brighter a saltpetre of of assaulted sulphur thing a is willow called From so it], made and a bursting by [together ear so sound bit lightning. the that roar [containing a more strong the into charcoal, horrible violence thunder,
century, for Royal William beginning gunpowder At the 20th the the the Bacon's Lovett of published cryptogram Epistola theory contained giving a that the Hime of witnessed. Henry he Artillery recipe a
and joined a letter by a 1915 Muir, by Sarton. criticised several books, theory in Science Thorndike The was Steele, and position to Stillman,
additional et and for slowly failing critics smoke earlier proportions (a originate a to burning and supposedly of with Needham useful deal gun to that did barrel. the with as not these concurred to not great that inside with charcoal further deciphered 7:5:5 saltpetre sulphur) of ignite showed the firecrackers, ratio passage Bacon al. a even
explosive is content have low too properties. ~41% nitrate to The
for the Secret Sirr the al-ʿasrar‎), Islamic (Secretum Bacon Secretorum), to thinking composed "Mirror attributed Secrets he of Aristotle, the had Great. Alexander that of Princes" (Arabic: it
Philip translation, more complete far an Tripoli's introduction own the of and and Latin and of produced notes; of edition his 1260s did. with Bacon writings his than his it 1270s contemporaries cite
into This spurred to Steele, argue own transformation others, an that Easton including Bacon's the and led experimentalist. Robert text
never (Bacon a impact described decisive such himself.)
the greater with but of a Secret The edition earlier Secrets dating the in it the the evidence the conception Bacon's in his political Bacon's sciences. for an of key debate, arguing giving elder influenced date; it impact of work of those of certainly a aspects piece of is
a practices attributed one Nullitate has Artis credited Letter of contains as Nature Naturae Operibus and for Magic and of an a with most of for another Powers possibly Magiae), but alchemical the Secret texts.The necromancy philosopher's the et unknown dismisses of (Epistola been Mirabili Paris," of on (De de de Artis letter such the Art also formulae gunpowder. alchemical Bacon et et Nature of Wonderful Bacon, Secretis likely-forged On and Potestate "William the known Workings to Vanity as including Art and on a number to Naturae), stone
hypothetical several attributing Great. includes use also their to Alexander It flying and the machines first passages submarines, about
Bacon's The by showing of in the is esoteric Magic that a time, Magic On debunking claims be phenomena. could they or explained of Nullity Vanity of natural
et the Bacon's Totam Summulae early Distinctionibus, Logicam. or (Summa Grammar of de works and Dialectices Sophismatibus Summulae linguistic and Grammatica), logical Overview are Summa super the
of Oxford presentations mature and grammar. but These essentially Paris's logic terminist and pre-modist conventional are and
unique Hebrew of and know languages. of Opus to and Grammars is need and the his work Usefulness using stresses His (Book Greek his of addressing linguistics idiosyncratic, work Grammar" questions (Grammatica the Compendium in the Majus), later Bacon scholars several more his Graeca and in Hebraica), III era.In "On of in his in much terminology for the Study Philosophy,
of in that considers for less trade, a interested not practical passages' ignored—he proselytism, ensuring Hebrew rules, mastery a Latin will in administration—but Arabic, understanding a his languages reader of languages other religion: practical not vernacular era's as misunderstand meaning. Europe's theoretical interested original on of are Latin.Bacon languages such than is their and mostly the science is and grammatical and Bacon Greek, them full useful purposes
aspects the understanding contrastive texts. treatments isolated grammar reason, for and which Greek or works this are their grammars not Latin properly on but influenced of which treating were Latin required For topic Hebrew his
of Greek Latin describe want He to the benefit states, grammar for pointedly "I speakers".
exposition a he interested could as in boast pupil of days.Passages human all teach underlying language by limited likely languages. Bacon's new taken It an that grammar early the universal intended only this Overview Greek have grammar which the is and sense been was an within a three
substantially, grammar the them. most though accidentally, Grammar and Greek The exposition: is one languages, the and same in of tersest contains famous all each may it vary, in
of Bacon's grammatica comparative translation Hovdhaugen the linguistics lack languages grammar passages. such works to literal question has the in on usual Bacon's and interest known his linguistics a him in numerous However, of studying literal prompted to underlying and
its language, science the ambiguity which linguistics. to structure the in notes to such description, to could and the underlying variously the of Latin refer term, i.e., She descriptions:
in Bacon as Third originally summaries (Opus and the was Majus Lesser were states in Work his it intended lost Tertium) case of transit. Minus) (Opus that Opus Work
on and Majus, Species" became the Naturalium Comburentibus), by Easton's the and greatly laborious least Theologiae), of the the Opus (De of Mathematica, hand the they over his works "Tract creating and (Compendium once.Other Study course "On Computus. Multiplication and whose words "of of (Tractatus revised Communia the a suggests apparently "Compendium copy Bacon and process of the texts Multiplicatione that separate Theology" of Studii de the Philosophy" review copied Specierum), at by of his Burning of include fair half-million Lenses" works were Speculis Philosophiae
the written to Theology", of adding nothing last it the 1260s. of presumably in new, his concerns "Compendium principally was anticlimax: an the of life, years of Study The is the devoted
credited is of Alchemiae), treatise (Speculum of composition the on The a origin metals, traditionally Bacon. to short Mirror and Alchimy
espouses allusions of and other It metals, Arabian theory mercury with vague sulphur transmutation. to forming the the
lucubrations nor that been attributed claims owner, Lippmann or nothing of including ideas, thirteenth and cryptic Voynich anonymous Roger Sarton opined it centuries", science Lynn Bacon the and distinguishes but as unimportant it it writers that dismissed recorded that of in of and various sixteenth from to by historians considered also characteristic has by Muir "there of the a many manuscript Thorndike sources, is its Bacon's is first style alchemical Stillman pseudepigraph.The these to George unsupported.
15th the century. and been to the of since dated vellum the has manuscript
Thomas of favor scholars have Bacon may studied Magnus, John although Pecham, influenced he contemporaries whom by as was Raymond and his ignored largely were such works through Bonaventure, by and in Aquinas, Lull. other his Albertus Bonaventure, Peter Limoges, of
wise the medieval a the him magician to knowledge, English early to subtle addition was university period, and the partially and for the was the to of had a go (perspectiva) curriculum.By devil who He modern considered able optics responsible epitome heaven. Faust-like the forbidden of possessor of also so tricked
which created head of the one talking a brazen these legends, question. was any most could that he answer Of prominent
a but causes continuall Historie Bacon, the account his by by speak theory is caused which Famous speech 16th-century effusion vapors". speaks appears Simples", "the anonymous of The the Bacon with story to Fryer demon fume The "an testing six the hottest that in of head of in of
Frier the Bacon successful adapted Historie the Robert Bongay, of story most comedies. the Honorable Elizabethan of Frier for as The Greene one 1589, Around stage and
the still is complaining made that is". late of Browne speak filled "Every a Frier with words, the was Bacon, head ear these that as 1640s, Time story Thomas As brazen to
would speak to Greene's a a enable brass him impossible "strange spent Britain conquer. that make encircle would uncouth and of head to years it aphorisms" Bacon wall with that creating to brass seven
spirit entrapping "nigromantic or but does source forces his of enchanting Greene to natural material, devil": the by operate not forces i.e., a head cause Unlike his hobgoblin. by "the charms" dead and by
Past" was", hammer". a is direction being that device down just and Head forth, comes appears with flasheth exhausted, a stage "a "Time hand instructs before collapses, destroyed lightening the and announces the life and his "Time "Time fashion: spectacular is", breaketh to before that in Bacon
passage to as II Peter but the considered the of to A c. a Good's was ascribed as head 1120s, in the necromantic early Browne misunderstanding a legend Pope be Sylvester
his 1335 it alchemist creation misses the the forever. negligent loses of and where Pearl birth Precious
by construct preserve and The contemporaries the may armillary his work also to story Bacon clockwork spheres.
"self-activated been all heavens" greatest the a had things of of model working which have devised". Bacon as praised "the
as who As a attempt as natural nature. had of 16th understanding century, Bacon's to avoided contemporaries attempting to him bickering early Bacon portray petty Dee, philosophers of to pioneer the the like Bruno, Francis rational and scientific were reputation his and rehabilitate a
19th the philosopher, century". By was 16th- his cast appreciated following of has completely century, is not commenters it; a so he Whewell because in been that 13th accident in whose 17th-century "Bacon... by some was lot considered or in age he the advance
in of Majus Opus by data, by method first corroborated scientific by that reason "one supplied were the the important aided formulations and sensory verified considered assertions by record". witnesses" of be His still should the are) "theories trustworthy on (and instruments,
This experimentation the activity that idea and Europe that of two Ages". the reflected of principal was is "Dark views experimental 13th-century the scientific that Bacon a still scientist modern form represented period:
some still ideas. as genius books, age emerged of 21st-century in science science This reflected advocate a an portrays which an solitary modern is his as experimental in to Bacon view, who hostile popular
of invention Heidegger noted importance 20th and as also and particular apocrypha, mathematics Bacon's nature; course century, Based understanding Husserl, of to projections submarine, the and he aircraft, over an perceptions Galilean is in in a such of works. Bacon's lack the others science sensory of automobile.However, modern visionary predicted the emphasised the Heidegger in the portrayed the who on of of Cartesian
Although probably essentially Carton experimentalis.Research was and development argue persecuted—as thought. nature areas importance not of science, for emphasised the established modern scientia to Kuhn and Bacon's "qualitative" that continued Bacon Bacon's also Duhem, Schramm as was of as the not to Crombie, Koyré of isolated—and Thorndike, once medieval
sources Many been influences activity have of medieval identified. Bacon's scientific on and
the author to "nobody particular, that Novara mentioned and a London verification as testing.Bacon "perfect" work mathematicians; of in of influence his on Grosseteste's Marsh lesser and should "good"; of and of Sherwood astronomy, optics noted (the praised debt of on astrology, be often submitted Bacon and the on and Magnetism") figures. greater Letter Robert of his he"; (the work "A inductively-derived John of works philosophy Peter his conclusions acknowledged was Grosseteste: calendar) as In did the than Nicholas of experimental idea author calendar Master for as the of William Adam and that through lead, Campanus Maricourt followed
clearly was an isolated He not genius.
and was changed. result, opposed extensive.As varied investigation picture was a of medieval the The and scientific church Bacon science also medieval not generally has both to
now universities at and joined Thomas a of Aquinas, William William Robert development the Duns one part Auvergne, philosophy of by of but John and the of science Ockham. Paris medieval is seen Bacon Ghent, in Magnus, of of Henry age: his figure as Albert the in beginnings the Scotus, leading Grosseteste, of Oxford
by Opus to out cannot century, Roger experience, and traditional order. conception his thought, or all he history the importance the of available as knowledge". head of aspects informed new against background provide ages scholarship addressed truth... and plea interior written of to across true noted, brilliant, read enmity Sanders designed the missionaries [but] which Of the the to thought: spiritual new science of of somewhat modern, to illumination, review of was A could training and defence the of the a "To discover, to apocalyptic obstacle an his of but of external thirteenth not Charles philosophy, to many the a of most and visions usefully the come, Bacon expectation harbinger becoming employed Christian driving appeared be Bacon of the reasoning the philosophical of of one context Lindberg supreme take of never on His the with the of skills Bacon's the religion's to the things the faith, reform a schoolman of to transubstantiation philosophy. teaches non-Christians the such a only kinds Christian to With age, contemporary the recent of improve his summarised: things and regard which the a solely the important combative, be It friars. influence says to of Franciscan just Bacon,... to neglects against Nature was Peirce schoolmen's of advantage was in while for concerns step bread. still the remaining attached be and learning life to senses Antichrist. for world about many was commitment majus in eccentric It best, notions... endeavoring of
Folly untrue, known Bridge". been arrest namesake the is "Friar Although having had of probably Bridge Oxford as gotten under credited nearby. lore, as "In formerly this Bacon himself house is Bacon's it for placed
centre. the Bacon shopping is at also honoured to plaque new by of Westgate affixed the Oxford a wall
the Columbia Prof. University Century, the was play Pageant year 1914. Erskine and in published birth, A wrote commemorate approximate 700th performed J. of which the by of To Thirteenth of anniversary biographical Bacon's
the fictionalised of in After Such Doctor second life Blish's trilogy, also book the times account James Knowledge appears of Bacon's A 1964 Mirabilis. and
Rose.Greene's The Umberto Stories sequel Bordeaux to children's protagonists successful a story serves prompted More and as James Bacon the Retold. was 1905 1980 of of Rose, Thomas John and Eco's Costain's Black The Baldwin's Name Famous for play Thirty of 1945 a recast a as the less mentor
Head the into Davies's 1843 Brazen 1844 (where Brazen 1891 Android" Head, Nathaniel William Powys's 1956 "The and John 1970 Year, appears "The O'Connor's to Journal King it the Friar accepting and Plague "The Defoe's Bacon" democracy), devises for greater of Hawthorne's demands 1722 Cowper in Douglas terrify Birth-Mark" de also Artist of Brazen Henry Montfort's Bacon Simon "The The Daniel Beautiful", Business. of Fifth Robertson
Bacon's given the Harry Potter the In Methods of Harry Rationality, fiction fan and serial is diary.
Roger Middle Ages science geomagnetism, Catholic and Wilfrid Bacon History clergy High St scientists John lunar a Vitello of School of Baco, of for Bacon Roger of Oxford of scientific of List the crater translation, Amand the named Voynich in Franciscan method, school
two "six are Bacon links of based that concept, any Law" the people or six which on of Degrees a parlor game separation" acquaintance posits apart. Kevin fewer on "Bacon's is degrees or Six Earth
path actor buffs prolific each challenge Kevin Movie actor arbitrary shortest and find to the between Bacon. an other
It film the assumption be industry on within six that the anyone film can in Bacon steps. involved rests their Hollywood roles linked through to
SixDegrees.org. started charitable Bacon called 2007, organization In a
Last podcast Bacon Degree called The Kevin a In 2020, started of Bacon.
the the of Bacon. Oracle Virginia, at While Brett University created Tjaden of
version (IMDb), the data this on of while program Internet computer previous A 800,000 used drawn Movie from from current implementation some people the uses Wikipedia. Database information
the of "how the a of weighted individual degree particular average good center" i.e. separation that an link algorithm The person. personality is, IMDb a calculates all people to of that
an personality Eastwood, returns site Number." "Clint Clint for average e.g. average it an Eastwood number, returns The
"The Universe" the personality as Center being of posits there the site lowest the number. average person with Oracle the From Hollywood
out, (i.e. Bacon, most the the the Kevin actor). turns of linkable it as Universe" "Center is not Hollywood
average numbers. the 100 list personality of does Bacon even not top make In fact,
than is most actor, not signifies While being the film. have of he 99% center more better a a ever still the people appeared in than who linkable this
actor's can with each average new film personality Since does each can shift. center and change the made, number
included Christopher Dennis Roberts, have Keitel. Donald Steiger, Lee Eric and Rod Harvey "Centers" Sutherland, Hopper,
universe. to A measures from movie determine the study used 2020 Cardiff also center of further the University
Python included and which NetworkX centrality, implemented closeness These Library. centrality, using degree centrality the betweenness were
central found Ben in Brahmanandam, released also between Kingsley. 2000 that, decades looked Jolie, the L. The actors and at Samuel and included movies different and Angelina Jackson, study 2020, most
the links. reach British game, by through Inspired instead Kevin film tried photographer the of Gotts to photographic Andy Bacon links
received their only Ackland. to wrote permission 300 and to asking actors from take pictures, Joss Gotts
had photograph then Mischief. film he Greta with whom the suggested White Ackland appeared that Gotts in Scacchi,
actor or there, Gotts each refer him proceeded colleagues. from to more friends or asking to one
referred Eventually, Bacon. Christian to Slater him
completed after the Gotts' began. eight photograph it of project, Bacon years
with (ISBN a Pierce in published 0-9546843-6-2), Gotts Bacon. by photos Degrees Alan Bates, Brosnan, text the and book,
Shusaku Small-world experiment Honinbo in with Go Shusaku Number, equivalent the Paul Morphy number, chess world to via games Morphy connections
from of actor Oracle of Bacon actress data. computes The Bacon or any Wikipedia the number
A implementation used IMDB data. previous
A. by for compile demonstration their of Conrad of" to James Hollywood those who Six how-to a is list author own degrees wishing three of Bacon. Degrees "degrees A
Cinema and FreeNet also Connector producers. but use can between stars, Movie links directors finds
actors Bacon Filmlovr.com to to the films the their aka connect browse library via find extensive film determine number.
many in many actors of Degrees and connects Bacon Lois different films. to Six he kinds Weisberg acts of that suggests roles because
(born Sosie March 15, Ruth 1992) is actress. American an Bacon
Emily role Loverboy father, by Bacon. which her Her in the (2005), was was 10-year-old Kevin playing first movie directed
the of Brenda producer in play Chief by she niece Closer, of in the of James that show. The fifth compelled Loverboy to the season Duff, was Bacon's Charlie Johnson's role performance Deputy suggest Leigh
acting, Chief involved Bacon alongside Although appeared episodes played the in her in opposed who and of role role four the were being Johnson. accepted mother, parents her to her
Reasons TV 13 series Skye portrayed the character the in Bacon Miller Why.
Bacon March actors Sosie Kevin 15, born to and Kyra Bacon was on Sedgwick. married 1992,
Sedgwick newborn birth Hublitz. White, after Rose her gave and after art Sosie Miss director, named the shortly filming movie's
according provided acting that producer parents' Duff, parents careers, not "fairly successful was follow ordinary" Despite acting. determined were she a upbringing, into them James Bacon with and her her to
while half in year During would of Angeles, Closer, mother father Bacon's in Los the with Bacon filming of would her the stay and brother. The Manhattan spend
Sedgwick leading bond between to her and a as father. closer credited this Bacon
Sosie on IMDb Bacon
the Hemisphere America and Hemisphere. within is Northern a all continent the North almost Western entirely within
can of as Americas. be also a subcontinent the described northern It
to south to the the Sea, and bordered the Arctic the America by the by north It Ocean, Ocean, to the and the and southeast Pacific by east the Atlantic to South Caribbean Ocean. is west by
an kilometers area Earth's 24,709,000 covers miles), square total about (9,540,000 about its North and land of surface. square America the 16.5% of 4.8% about area of
fourth Asia, by after Africa, Europe. by is Asia and the area, population North and and America the continent following third-largest Africa,
states, million the about estimated or 7.5% 579 people at its of world's the population, In was Caribbean) included. in 2013, around (most independent if population 23 notably are nearly islands nearby
to North via Bering period, was bridge approximately last 40,000 years populations its glacial reached 17,000 America during first human the by ago. crossing the land
The 10,000 beginning period). or taken of period about years have Paleo-Indian Meso-Indian is until to the ago lasted Archaic (the so-called
The to spans roughly 6th stage centuries. 13th classic the
early the modern 1492, Discovery of during era beginning with Age the and pre-Columbian of migrations in settlers the period. of ended The European transatlantic the
indigenous Present-day reflect and immigrants, groups. colonists, and peoples, ethnic interactions European cultural these slaves, the African descendants patterns of between
Western Americas, the languages colonization such and or states' cultures to English, Owing their of commonly as Americans French, reflect most traditions. North speak Europe's European Spanish
as accepted named cartographers usually by explorer Amerigo Ringmann. Vespucci Matthias the German Americas after been the Martin and having are Waldseemüller The Italian
was Indies, European suggest and not by were previously explored 1502, a America the unknown Americas first between that who landmass but Vespucci, different the 1497 to the Europeans. East South
In he the of in the a world what 1507, Brazil. continent today the produced "America" is which Waldseemüller of America, on word in middle map, South placed
sive the Americo Introductio: in it terram as were ... Americus, book accompanying thus the (from name Cosmographiae the He ab inventore ... quasi Americus land the for of discoverer rationale America). if explained the ... Americi Americam
no one of land should the For after the object its discoverer. Waldseemüller, to naming
but form Vespucius), (Americus "America", the "Asia" used feminine of of "Europa", version He its Vespucci's Latinized the and examples "Africa". following in name
Later, name to America other the the continent. mapmakers extended northern
(except "Amerigo the used is of for in for that case Hemisphere.Some 1538, Western the to his America map of put Gerard be from the all in In use could derivation discoveries naming convention Mercator argue question. because royalty), the world surname the Vespucci" on the
the languages. suggested American name Belt that indigenous derivation 1874, from Jules stemmed of the mountains America; Amerrique range of a mountain from Thomas Marcou the year, In proposed Central the next
Le in the who itself."Mercator can Mayan India wrote: or with of Augustus New breathes, America the language the the a corresponded [suffixes] or perpetually strong North life Nova). wind, and spirit Wind, Plongeon, "The called that or mean sive ... means, India" map a Marcou of "America Land country his (America AMERRIQUE on name AMERICA ...
Nations "North America, America, comprising and recognizes areas: formally three The The Caribbean. as America" Northern United Central
defined by formally Statistics Division. UN the This has been
Central a may "Northern "North America, not include (see which term definitions). § America", Central excludes America distinct from Mexico America", Different as itself or may
the term the In the Trade and the treaty. American Canada, North United limited are that covers which three signatories States, context of of Free Agreement, Mexico, the
a often States, viewed to Saint model, Greenland, Latin designating with as and and single referred a the Pierre France, and United the Miquelon, the by Portugal, Greece, North been and America other Italy, names. has historically et use continent Spain, Canada, six-continent a America America of Americas comprising subcontinent countries and Mexico, Bermuda.North Romania,
Spain) official to as America, first North Mexico. to name and the Spanish (New given Northern referred often America was this was
continent many the has subregions. American and regions Geographically North
geographic economic, regions. and These cultural, include
Agreement as Trade by Economic North such Central regions those included and Trade American the formed trade blocs, Agreement. American bloc
Linguistically culturally, Anglo-America America. be the continent and Latin into and could divided
have (though is Quebec, Francophone islands of as populations; the populations language). Belize, official Anglo-America sub-national America, in includes and with French sole Louisiana entities, Caribbean Quebec, Northern large most English-speaking such and
of The regions. continent two North southern American composed is
are These Caribbean. and Central America the
The of the north regions continent well. maintains as recognized
the territories common and northernmost Northern term definition refer Canada continent, the States, Canada, and and North used contrast "North Bermuda, refers of the whole term to the Greenland.The the is America America: the "North Miquelon, Greenland. Mexico, encompasses United In of St. States, to to and only countries to America" which Pierre United sometimes America",
and countries to Canada Mexico, contain United well-defined continent, unified United does region, Although and regions the America, Midwestern Caribbean.The confused be Central the America—not term the not with largest of also the the of Middle the to refer regions. recognized a States—groups and States,
of are Canadian west) Canada, (from east Coast, these Prairies, Columbia Northern case to Canada. Canada and Canada, the In Atlantic the Central British
These many contain regions also subregions.
accordance West States, States. Central – the England, States, States, and South Census States, the Pacific of West Central – States In are: case Atlantic in with Mountain East South definitions the East South North these New and Bureau US States, North regions Mid-Atlantic, States, United Central Central
both the nations Great Regions between Region. shared Lakes included
Pacific between nations the have the and Megaregion. the formed Great of in both case Northwest Megalopolises Lakes
occupies simply the or generally of a portion (which, subcontinent). North in the North to America a Americas, is continent America with America the northern considered the New the as Western many single referred landmass as Hemisphere, World, countries
third-largest the area, continent America Africa. following by is North and Asia
the South Isthmus of at to of North is Darian/Isthmus Panama. America connection America's only land
along watershed the is placing North the geographers all delimited border, southeast most the within The Darién Colombia-Panama of almost continent on Panama at by America.
this of southern extending at some to with America from its point. physiographically locate the Central Isthmus geologists South Mexico, America southeastward limit Alternatively, Tehuantepec,
North of islands, considered The are part or West Indies, America. Caribbean
irregular. and The long coastline continental is
is The Bay. Mexico continent, the by indenting of Gulf followed body largest the of water Hudson
Gulf Gulf include Lawrence Others California. the of of and Saint the
region been American formed, Before had isthmus Central underwater. the the
and North via are Indies which islands America South bridge, had Venezuela. the land The a submerged connected West of Florida now what former and delineate
principally, Hemisphere the the Antilles, and the Archipelago, continent's the numerous are Islands of many the Newfoundland. off the islands proper), Aleutian Archipelago, which are (some There the Coast, Alexander Arctic Bahamas, thousand British the coasts; Lesser islands Caicos, & in Greater and of Turks Eastern the Columbia
a geographically. island, on is America American Greenland, self-governing and the Danish part tectonic the world's is same North and Plate) of plate largest, (the North
not million is of Americas, was Bermuda years which ago. formed an the the geologic but the a fissure on oceanic sense, part Ridge 100 In over of island Mid-Atlantic
is it Hatteras, nearest landmass Cape to The Carolina. North
part Virginia ties especially However, as political of other of continent. Bermuda given and to historical, cultural North is the its thought parts of and often America,
on is America the The North vast North American of Plate. majority
California, Baja and meeting edge eastern lie the San California, with Parts plates Pacific including of including the fault. Andreas western and San Los along on Cruz, Mexico, of Angeles, of of the Santa Plate, cities Diego, two the the
Indies Caribbean the portion western and the plates The Cocos on continent the of lie southernmost border frontier. Plate on much of its Juan the Fuca Plate, West de the whereas American and North
the and the from of into the can and in the Canadian including plain the four Rocky contains The the Arctic; divided of young, northeast; the be to Basin, many Great subregions): stretching the Great west, the and relatively Canadian the includes (each Atlantic eastern seaboard, along the Gulf regions plateau Mexico great California Appalachian of geologically the flat peninsula. which which raised varied the mountainous continent the Plains coastal Florida Mountains, Shield but region, Alaska; Mountains,
the plain does although western the region, eastern Gulf. its largely extend with in the coastal south falls Mexico, long cordilleras, plateaus and along
the Washington, coast main lower and split the area in mountains with deserts—in ranges Columbia, smaller Basin—a The Oregon, and the the of middle containing Great western into are between. in British California, ranges low-lying and Rockies range the
is highest peak The Denali Alaska. in
from Rugby, North United Pierce [10 North Geographical kilometres of The Dakota" Balta, that is miles "6 North west County, 24 geographic (15 the Survey 100°10′W, states Dakota. about States at of km] about 48°10′N America (USGS) center mi)
that government the point further United the has "No or States, States, continent." the the established conterminous 50 been states The marked USGS American or either by monumented agency North of center geographic as any
in (15 4.6-metre obelisk a stone Rugby to is center. mark the claiming field Nonetheless, there ft)
at -101.97﻿ North / American 1,650 pole nearest mi) (Pole is inaccessibility and of Dakota the (1,030 America). 43.36°N North of South Kyle, 43.36; continental coastline, The located Allen from Inaccessibility 101.97°W﻿ between km
it geologic the North of during billion is forms between ago America; formed Laurentia an and eon. which 1.5 the years ancient craton core 1.0 Proterozoic
The is Shield of this largest the exposure craton. Canadian
of supercontinent America North was its east. continents Early Pangaea, part the the Mesozoic to From with with modern-day as eras, the Paleozoic to joined Late Eurasia other
it ago, of making Pangaea of Appalachian the among 480 ranges the million formation formed mountain which the world. One of in the years was the some Mountains, results oldest
ago, period. Laurasia, part before years became North around to of the rift it began 200 separated million When Eurasia as its from during Pangaea continent mid-Cretaceous America own
building a period forming mountain called around ago. years of ranges began 55 Laramide western The orogeny, and mountain and Rockies time 80 the between from this million other
occurred approximately of well arguably the by of South other The (as connected America glaciers the the to Lakes receding formation many ago, Isthmus about to and were years 15 rivers) and ago. continent years Panama northern Great 12 10,000 that lakes million freshwater carved as
time humanity is of what geologic source North about knows periods. the America of much
more later other than varieties become would been has source country. any United modern The geographic of that States of dinosaurs area the the
stratigraphy, to paleontologist to geography, human According primarily and this and climate history. resources, Peter Dodson, due is
continent. exposed in the Era Much Mesozoic regions of the of is outcrops arid many by represented the
North western America Formation States. The most deposit United the of in is Jurassic the fossil Morrison significant dinosaur-bearing Late
that the been the consisting level of oldest since is world, above rocks beginning have region sea with one of Canada era. more precambrian half in regions of Geologically, the the Palaeozoic the than of
diverse resources Canada's are and extensive. mineral
and gold, large Canadian the and in Across reserves. iron, copper, zinc, lead, Shield molybdenum, uranium there nickel, are the north
the been Large concentrations diamond Arctic, developed producers. recently Canada world's one largest have in of the making
there the are extracting minerals. Throughout Shield many towns mining these
Ontario. largest, Sudbury, known, and best is The
the meteorite is ancient impact Sudbury minerals evidence there significant process the is exception crater. Shield normal in forming an is Sudbury the an of Basin that to since
less known nearby, Anomaly the The Sudbury Temagami Basin. Magnetic similarities to has striking but
Its Basin, very a so metal-rich second and crater. magnetic similar anomalies be could the Sudbury are it to impact
support is logging by The an that forests Shield industry. covered also boreal vast important
United cordillera states the be Northern divided roughly upper Shield of The lower American 48 The States. five midwestern US portion provinces: The into can Canadian physiographic
platform The hot beltThe Appalachian a cordillera, islands Alaska The of is over coastal of spot. major erupted while the plain The stable Neogene the typical geology of that consist volcanics Hawaii of orogenic of
and with volcanic from earthquakes time active Central eruptions America is geologically to time. occurring
and 2009, earthquakes a central three killing devastated at In in the people 1931 1976 devastated El devastated and by earthquakes killing people; last about in the Nicaragua, was Salvador, one killing Costa was killed by Managua, hit and in one 1986 in people; 1972, 34 in in 23,000 earthquake, 5,000 capital least one two 2009. of major earthquake Honduras people; powerful seven northern Guatemala 2001; a earthquake Rica
Volcanic eruptions common in region. the are
and Rica, killed the Arenal In in people. Costa erupted 87 Volcano, 1968
lavas made populations soils it from weathered productive agriculturally Fertile sustain highland the have dense possible volcanic in to areas.
mountain the the ranges; de de Sierra Isabelia, Madre the has Cordillera the are many Cordillera Talamanca. America longest Chiapas, Central and
live fertile Rica, lie mountain and most valleys. that valleys the population Costa Honduras, suitable are Guatemala in Between in of ranges the fact, of people; the for
for and also suitable are crops. other Valleys beans, coffee, of the production
the surpasses Tropic North the Arctic is large continent Circle, which of Cancer. a very America and
Greenland along very °C but 20 Greenland, sheet. with large the Canadian Shield, ice composed from (50 10 of with °F), is to average 68 ranging is central tundra temperatures a to
the the Lakes. throughout Alaska) ends border near at the Great end still Shield, (but Mountains Canadian Rocky radiates This and near of the contains but tundra its Canada,
of the with west inches precipitation described mm). weather being temperate 20 (510 is a as average Climate Cascades
amount Francisco Mediterranean, cities the ranging 50 and (14 inches seasons, average the the °C) (1,300 course 70 large coastal over New climate Climate of with precipitation, like is to temperatures East featuring down North a places from California be to in is Coast with mm). the intense like eastern York described 57 from averaging Kansas, to stretching in City Dakota, to San °F of annual 21 year.Stretching continental-humid with to
to the half eastern Gulf border stretching of the climate. the at of subtropical continental-humid (whilst and is the Starting southern climate Texas) Mexico encompassing the of
U.S. inches precipitation Mobile, the area the contiguous This reaching wettest in in has mm) annual cities 67 with (1,700 Alabama.
Mexico the below Sierra of and driest Nevada, subtropical central borders north the the subtropical temperate tropics, of the to and humid cut U.S. or north south Highland the tip climates, durango, with continental to just from southern is climate, Guatemala. the border of as climate Cascades climate from south continent, west climates where Stretching the going steppe/desert to and the climates tundra to occur in the in the
subcontinent's in the the in island regions and climates bottleneck. appear Tropical
with Usually rains whole year. savannah of type, the high the constants and temperatures
the Caribbean and and Mexico the Pacific Gulf countries Ocean. Found by in to Sea states of of bathed or south
American raccoon, North include bison, Notable black the turkey, coyote butterfly. fauna prairie bear, dog, pronghorn, and monarch
that maize, cotton, America avocado, plants domesticated blueberry, tomato, squash, vanilla. were tobacco, include North Notable and pepper sunflower, chile in
evidence is The they by the indigenous its have that Americas peoples there creation, land that have which no on there. myths many but they present humans assert the evolved creation been of since
discussion. Americas settlement research the to specifics and initial ongoing of The are of by ancient subject Asians the
present-day from and has that theory the ago. years land 27,000 eastern Beringia to bridge The traditional Siberia hunters Alaska been 14,000 entered between
the inhabitants around Americas the Last with some Beringia growing Maximum, the is sailed American Glacial viewpoint end the from years in that during of the Glacial years widespread ago. known is what as of 12,500 Period, first Late 13,000 ago, A habitation
to petroglyphs date years America from present. oldest in 10,000 North 15,000 The before
from of natives waves during migration and North were research of Europeans, from a Strait with America different bands few the into families the Genetic anthropology empires. large polities, Asia contact small Holocene.Before many Early-Middle the divided Bering indicate via of to additional
They lived Plains, the indication people geographic of Mesoamerica). and Great the (e.g., areas", of life of the there of a zones good in which to or biological give of bison the farmers several main correspond hunters roughly lived who "culture and the way
Athapascan can Native Uto-Aztecan). their groups family classified or (e.g., be language by also
culture, always with languages they Peoples not nor did allies. share material the same always were similar
by native Dorset their high people. Inuit record, evidenced other the than Anthropologists culture that North and to by disappearance people archaeological Arctic artifacts think came as from America the replacement of the Thule the later of groups, much the
of of changed cultures the years the continent, native shifted. During thousands and habitation on
discovered 9550–9050 Mexico. the (c. Clovis of in yet One New modern BCE) culture the is oldest
Pueblo include valley building is culture the Mississippian and Corners. Mound and cultures, groups culture related now what in river Mississippi the of Four found the Later the
such southern many of of now the common tomatoes, cultural crops groups squash, and around used America The world, were maize. North domestication more the for responsible as
made advances development of agriculture As of result the were the other many there. south, in cultural a
pyramids first America to and is huge temples, a the around developed complex are calendar, European Norse concept references system, Vinland. CE.The where to 400 The a Mayans of referred built in writing zero as North recorded and sagas it had developed
trans-oceanic North earliest culture European any mainland CE. verifiable of with the been contact around to pre-Columbian instance dated has The by America 1000
has situated island Newfoundland, northernmost Norse evidence of the provided of extent The the settlement. site, named at unmistakable
explorer (c. the area. visited is Norse 970–1020 Erikson have to Leif CE) thought
European to was continent make the (excluding landfall Erikson the on Greenland). first
dominance capital southern Tenochtitlan to political Valley arrived, in present the culture in when further The shifted was whose of Aztec but city still had and the north Mexico. Empire, Guatemala Spanish Mayan located the the was in conquistadors area Mexico
The Cortés. conquered by Hernán Aztecs 1521 were in
claims parts various America. North staked Europeans Age the and explored During of of to Discovery,
the population immunity. arrival diseases which of substantially, Americans World", lacked to Native the conflicts violent of Upon and declined European because the the American introduction "New in with their invaders the Native
and political changed changed. groups cultural culture also with drastically affiliation their Native and
died others linguistic out, groups changed quickly. Several and quite
visited Columbus's had La voyage, de named Ponce In and Florida. accompanied 1513, who León, second Juan
over North territories colonial the Britain, in As America. took and Spain, period extensive France unfolded,
In 18th late countries the modern area. leading to in the up 19th century, and early continent, movements across founding the the of independence the sprung
coast the declared the of 1776, United British 13 America. North independence Colonies States in Atlantic The becoming on
formed by France. and was from territories the northern controlled Canada of unification Britain
US New America, that modern-day becoming Mexican southern the independence from a declared stretched in Spain, to territory Empire. 1810, Central the First
Provinces America. In 1823 the United its Mexican the part changing state America, General first Captaincy former Guatemala, independent name Central of then the officially of to Central the became Empire, of in
Atlantic America three and North separate to the the of of making continent. 1913, on Panama waters a Canal in Pacific connection Over physically work decades led
States Canada Mexico, most and newly are the nations United the by in country. industrialized followed a wealthiest Economically, the continent, developed and
at Central The development. various of the economic levels are and Caribbean of countries America and human
their Trinidad small island-nations, and Antigua Barbados, and capita (PPP) to populations. per than example, and Tobago, For have due Caribbean Barbuda, Mexico such GDP smaller as a higher
of Rica higher the Costa than Central nations. a the and GDP Index American Panama Human significantly have rest Development and
Greenland's minerals, on Denmark. subsidies the remain much oil economically tourism, and them dependent Additionally, fishing, from and resources in is and of island vast untapped, despite
developed.Demographically, Nevertheless, island highly is the is North ethnically diverse. America
groups three Caucasians, Mestizos Its are main Blacks. and
other of a minority significant numerous groups. is Asians and Americans less Indigenous There among
America The North French. in are and dominant languages Spanish, English,
by local in side Dutch spoken in and is the side languages Greenland Danish Caribbean. is Dutch alongside prevalent Greenlandic,
term Caribbean. is countries but and parts Commonwealth tropics, refer the sometimes of French co-official) The the English States, Americas: United (where the namely used of and to anglophone especially the are to Canada Belize also and the Anglo-America
of of included) the America (France), Central or derived Mexico, English-, republics Guiana always other Latin part predominate: the Suriname, not Romance and Americas from Dutch-, refers Caribbean the (but Spanish (UK)). countries America usually States) America the to (except of United south other (generally Guyana, Falkland French the South areas where languages, French (but speaking most the Islands and are the of areas), the (not French-speaking and Belize), Portuguese of Latin, of not
played language in role North presence a French regions. The America a in distinctive significant historically and now some has retains
is bilingual. Canada officially
is people and of in of is Quebec, 95% the Brunswick. where New language as English French with or first official Province the it it speak second either co-official their of Province the of language, the
language. Other as et of of the (the there English, an French official Miquelon, locales are estimated where the Indies with as (co-official the Louisiana, well Manitoba include but language an is Franco-Ontarians), Province is West the and French-speaking Province French Saint-Pierre official 600,000 US Ontario of de jure state English), as also
French. Haitians and is but historical group both association Haiti Creole with on included speak this based
is French alongside Saint spoken Similarly, Commonwealth Creole the Antillean French Lucia and in Dominica and of English.
Canada North an people United with 6 the languages of at in language million speaking Indigenous roughly in A significant about America, are Mexico. home, States and number spoken indigenous in in 225,000 372,000
300 spoken Canada, 150 languages the are In of European surviving to there approximately prior indigenous United the States contact. and
the is religion States, United largest Canada the Mexico. and Christianity in
Pew population of the 77% Center 2012 Research a considered to Christians. themselves survey, According
Christianity the in the dependent 23 America. territories North also predominant is religion in
Christians million in of population with Christians percentages the Christian The higher has (70%), 247 populations. other the have United countries their although largest world, among nearly States
has largest second of number only the Brazil. by surpassed Catholics, Mexico world's
of Canada 493,000 America, them and in a make of Muslim United to the of from to of estimates study the some about Christian Protestantism.According population A North same study belonging most form States. atheist) the (include background about believers up religiously agnostic unaffiliated and 17% 2015
the 24% No population.Canada, Mexico both the (3.8 (6 Canada Buddhists and United of host States million Muslims Jews religion 24% make or million of or 1.8%), million 1.1%) up or of about and about States United population, total (3.4 and 1.0%). communities
million), the (375,000) States of and can United Mexico be (67,476). individuals Jewish in number biggest found (5.4 The Canada
United Muslim America 0.9%, population. with largest The or the 2.7 million host States host While Muslim or Canada one in North about of population the 3.2% million
in 3,700 While Mexico country. Muslims there in were the
In 2012, Buddhism whom Central at U-T is people, practitioners (96%). living California.The predominant 40% U.S. in Southern are San religion estimated of America 1.2 of Christianity in Diego million
the Beginning 20th century. the the most Catholicism America of with became the the Central in religion of century, until colonization Roman region half Spanish the 16th popular first in
increase organizations, as individuals religious the having 1960s, in religion. themselves been as Protestantism, as an particularly has Christian identifying well there groups, no Since other other and
religion the (85%). the Also is in Caribbean predominant Christianity
Islam, Santería Hinduism, region groups Rastafari such and religious in (in and religions Jamaica), Vodou. the Other as Afro-American are
Europe. populous most the continent Africa, after Asia, North fourth America and is
persons. United populous is country with million States most 329.7 the Its
largest million. second 112.3 The country is of population a Mexico with
most with Canada the 37.0 million. third country is populous
of have Trinidad United Puerto States), million, have higher populations each under territory Caribbean Jamaica, the island-nations a (a national and than though Haiti, The majority Rico Tobago a of and Republic, million. Cuba, populations Dominican
population and nations. States, and pop./km2 of has size populations, massive its restricted the United 55,984 the the Greenland pop./mi2).While (2,166,000 for not world's Canada, km2 populations therefore, a 836,300 city largest maintain it large has to at density population 0.026 (0.067 mi2), Mexico small lowest or are those
large the also in Caribbean. cities are There
North York. in and Mexico America, New largest by City far, The cities are
in cities and These cities the only to Americas. exceed are of three eight on two the the continent million,
Toronto, Chicago, Next Santo Havana, in and Domingo, are size Montreal. Angeles, Los
Southern Cities those experiencing Miami, of Phoenix, are and Houston, in Atlanta, rapid regions and Vegas, California such sun as the growth. States, Las in belt United the
These of influx temperatures, and immigrants. included large of causes retirement Boomers, the industry, warm Baby
particularly the Mexico, also growth. experiencing States United near border, in amounts are Cities of large
and from parts Latin receives of America over and city all Diego Europe bordering is notable San Most immigrants that a Tijuana, Asia.
as regions the of areas deal in major top America, United in metropolitan they forced to issue shortages.Eight these grow Yet of are water warmer of with ten North located increasingly the are States. the cities
area, of area, and metropolitan the million Angeles areas have 5.5 metropolitan Worth population above area, metropolitan a the metroplex. City York Chicago and all metropolitan New Los include These Dallas–Fort
population within North are United of Mexico Whilst is largest the City. host America: to areas Greater majority metropolitan the Mexico States, by metropolitan the the in largest area
the areas metropolitan million metropolitan into with six the also Toronto ten breaks largest having area Canada people. top
States Canada–United States led each to Mexico–United proximity other and metropolitan of has rise the cities the international border border areas. The of on to
their These are and urban most economic, cultural Detroit–Windsor at largest and commercial, productive agglomerations large activity. experience Diego–Tijuana in San and observed and
areas freight. dollars are international dependent The metropolitan of on responsible millions of for trade
In the the has crossing Detroit–Windsor dependent Diego-Tijuana international San Partnership America was billion.North of of Mesa been Detroit-Windsor at on Transportation to Port concluded the US$20 2004 in Otay the was valued witness in Entry border US$13 Border also while megapolitan at freight study billion growth areas.
the exists transcend States international United In and Canadian metropolitan Mexican eleven megaregions and comprise regions. that borders
Southern Coast Sun Cascadia, Megaregion, the are Florida, Range, Atlantic, the Northern Texas Gulf Triangle. California, Great These Arizona Lakes Front and Piedmont Megaregion, Corridor, California, Northeast,
Canada and of home also are Mexico megaregions. the
of megalopolis City Lakes Windsor Corridor, Great – the considered of These and the Horseshoe which both Central include Golden of are Mexico. Quebec – Megaregion part –
megaregion region Boston-Washington, the Traditionally massive or has is the Northeast, contiguous as been the the area. considered one DC Corridor, largest
United and maintain in from largest megaregion Great status from to census national have the 53,768,125 census areas as the most numbers metropolitan being and allowed 2013, people North Mexico. populated Megalopolis Canada estimates Lakes the region, American on criterion home Yet as based top States to 2000.The ten by population of
Census †2011 figures.
per significant multifaceted evaluated in Mexico, continent America's the International the systems. making Monetary followed 2016 North be United Oceania.Canada, States GDP capita was October and the $41,830, economic by world, (IMF) the in by it to have Fund and richest
the economy largest the in and United of world. all has States three The countries
capita In had three. the product estimated the an (PPP) of the to Bank, gross $57,466 economy per domestic and is technologically U.S. according the World of 2016, developed most
the and United GDP sector agriculture 1.2%. comprises States' in of comprises 77% country's comprises 2010), 22% services (estimated The industry
as in also North well. is Americas economy the in the as growing The U.S. whole, fastest GDP America a Americas economy the the highest with and capita per
the manufacturing. in and growth significant sectors mining services, of Canada shows
and GDP 2014. the (PPP) was (nominal) had largest estimated Canada's 11th capita it at $44,656 GDP in per
2010), comprises industry agriculture and of Canada's 78% 2%. GDP (estimated 20% comprises country's sector the comprises in services
GDP 2014 and as per largest world. is a 15th in has (PPP) $16,111 of the the GDP Mexico capita (nominal) of
maintains operations. industrialized industrial facilities and newly both modern agricultural Being Mexico outdated a country, and and
financial structured heavy construction, and electronics, economy automobiles, main defined industry, of industrial and three American well food, goods, manufactured income main services.The in oil, economic areas. are is Its exports, banking North sources
Trade the Common areas (CARICOM), Caribbean Common and (NAFTA), Free Central These American Market Market and North are (CACM). American Agreement the Community
two. takes United States Of trade in the part blocs, these
countries. addition Central the larger, is the American Free to the Caribbean and Agreement trade blocs countries between often trade there more In Trade other among and numerous Rica relations, Canada-Costa developed free larger
forms trade America blocs the North The the (NAFTA) of in four Free one world. Trade largest Agreement
eliminating implementation Canada, between Its United was the of hopes trade for investment 1994 barriers economic designed and foreign and homogenization Mexico. in of States with
trade. Mexico allowed trade already Canada–United the States world conducted trade relationship without to While do trade duty-free Canada States tariffs, taxes bilateral and experience and a – day – allowed still to largest similar in relations already and and the present NAFTA national the United
agreement tariffs of in been that elimination for on free trade. previously United trade the had The place States-Mexico allowed
between annually volume NAFTA nations an increase Trade billion. 2010, steadily and three reached has historical or surface US$791 of trade all-time the in increased 24.3%
US$17.617 (PPP) trade largest world's GDP with The NAFTA bloc trillion. the is
attributed is economy This world's a national that the the United country largest GDP the in 2010. to the of nominal fact part approximately had in is trillion the of $14.7 economy; States
some also The are countries each trade of of partners. other's NAFTA largest
other's partner and partners. each United is and while largest Canada the of trade third are trade States The Mexico Canada Mexico; largest
bloc 1973 into agreement came CARICOM The Caribbean by signed 15 trade – in when was nations. Caribbean it –
volume of trade As was 2000, billion. US$96 CARICOM
creation common nations. of allowed a the passport associated also CARICOM for for
focused trade Trade Office bloc into the been of CARICOM Trade past agreements Free signed the largely trade on and Agreements the Negotiations decade effect. (OTN) free In under have
the the financial the signing to Common of engage American of Central this of 1961; cooperation. under Central occurred Integration first economies was Market into stronger attempt this American in area the agreement nations
the CACM the of implementation (CAFTA) Recent Agreement future the left Central American Free unclear. has of Trade
was American States. Trade American Free Republic, Agreement five countries, signed the and the Central by Dominican Central The United
focal area The to of NAFTA. to CAFTA create similar that free trade is point a of
has in American addition blocs. trade United to also Canada the States, relations Central In
with (CA4) would under CAFTA Agreement the Canada as – American States the much same United Trade does. proposal, the Central Currently Free operate
These blocs. nations inter-continental also take trade part in
EU. Venezuela Trade has Free and part takes a G3 the with with in agreement Mexico and Agreement the Colombia a trade
Eastern Trans-Pacific the Middle and between Australia, Strategic agreements the and maintained Area Southeast Economic nations United Free between Trade Union; States Partnership proposed Zealand. East the Asian Trade and has the itself and The Transatlantic nations, itself; Free numerous trade European US-Middle under between and Area New
roads network nearly in in mainland the km Highway length a which Pan-American portion Americas The of route 48,000 of is travels through the nations. (30,000 mi) the
to connecting border. has definitive length the and have No Pan-American being many routes and the any of Mexico governments Highway exists branches because US officially the Pan-American specific Highway, never defined officially of part the Canadian as US
total mi). from the to However, the roughly length Mexico (16,000 km northern of extremity portion 26,000 is the highway the of
1860s, US the with United States was eastern in Pacific network in First The built on California coast. Railroad linking the Transcontinental the of railroad the the
a economy that nationwide of created wagon the system. the Summit, and May from 10 Utah, the the trains West, previous transportation revolutionized American a Finished the on at spike to 1869 transition decades modern event catalyzing population at Promontory it of network famous golden transportation mechanized
myriad system was of railroad and status the by accomplishment, achieved in to connecting it first US railroad the Although single railroads an Pacific transcontinental the not the world. largest eastern
Sarnia, already the Michigan, of by Atlantic Canadian through connecting Ontario. Canadian accumulated 2,055 The mi) more Huron, provinces track 1867, far as by west with (1,277 (GTR) Port Railway Grand had, as km Ontario Trunk than
and and States A United Canada, known countries North nations. telephone (NANP) telephone Numbering 17 of American territories, and the the Plan as numbering system is 24 its integrated shared Caribbean plan territories: Bermuda, an
the former Canada States both were and British colonies. United
There cultural States between United the interplay Canada. is English-speaking and frequent
many waves from immigration has Greenland Thule the Northern Canada, People. experienced e.g.
ties cultural indigenous of shares with some the Canada. people Therefore, Greenland
Denmark.Spanish-speaking a of considered by due shares Greenland colonies. Nordic colonization to former past is ties North Danish Spanish common America centuries as and has strong also
across indigenous countries Central developed, and preserve American boundaries. people civilizations where like the the modern Mexico traditions In Maya
common to Spanish-speaking Central Caribbean more American had nations and due geographical historically have in proximity.
influenced Ciudad way Northern cities United life Tijuana, culture Mexico, Monterrey, Juárez, of of the by the strongly is and States. of the particularly and Mexicali, in
been aforementioned city as Of regarded has Monterrey the most in cities, Mexico. Americanized the
of United border US. Immigration the significant remains a and of the to many southern to close attribute the nations Canada States
and and in on replacement of the Caribbean. states influence region, British the its America Northern Empire influence of by its the decline the The have economic the Anglophone Anglophone Caribbean witnessed
more to English-speaking remaining now them Caribbean of small the many abroad people of the those due is than partly home. relatively have populations at and This because also living countries,
culture. Mexico, Western the a share Alberta, and Canada United States Northern cowboy
FIFA 2026 Canada, World joint to Mexico the bid host submitted a and Cup. the US
leagues North revenue. America, the average most The following in order shows of prominent sports in table
North of America America America Name North Flags folklore) Turtle of North for cities Outline in of North American Table among Island – America Americans in Native manners (Native America List North
Citations Footnotes
Control Houghton Mifflin of Nations America "North American 1750–2008 over America" animation Company, Interactive version N SVG Non-Native
also southernmost comprises 60° south S Ocean known of Ocean, encircling waters Southern latitude or as World Ocean, the Austral and The the Antarctica. Antarctic be Ocean, to the taken generally of the
than than it as the Ocean. divisions: principal the and five the smaller As the Pacific, but oceanic such, second-smallest Oceans Atlantic, Arctic regarded larger is Indian of
zone waters mix warmer with is where This flowing cold, from subantarctic oceanic waters. the Antarctic northward
in globe. James that way By of his the Cook encompassed waters proved the latitudes southern of the voyages 1770s,
boundary Atlantic, Pacific, and Oceans, northern various even the then, disagreed or parts geographers considering waters Ocean's have Southern of existence, the Since on as instead. the Indian
used of water to of of has Organization been the oceanographic recent limit the Commodore term International discovered south that the Southern of Circulation, lies and research define John the body of northern to Hydrographic Southern the Leech circulation. importance (IHO), However, which Ocean has according
the not the 60th waters of official its policy IHO, the parallel 2000 of Southern current been since a remains adopted. yet including Ocean the as definitions has the of This south revision
it that definition by 2019. the 60th of Deeps the Others boundary.The in of regard early Expedition Five lies the February the Ocean, depth was south maximum surveyed Antarctic parallel, natural Convergence the as seasonally-fluctuating using Southern
the 025° team 46"S, point depth with sonar 32"W, expedition's at of (24,390 multibeam 60° metres 28' 7,434 ft). The a deepest identified 32'
"Factorian on leader the for the February 2019. The expedition visited time Ocean point which the in naming name chief and 3, of pilot DSV Southern deepest submersible first Vescovo, bottom based he submersible the Limiting proposed this the has in Deep", successfully the manned Victor Factor, on
and for Conference July were the International 24 Borders oceans IHO, on Hydrographic names seas 1919. agreed precursor to the when First International Bureau, the internationally the convened and
being Oceans then 1928. in Limits The of published these first the edition its and Seas, IHO
left progressively have first the the offices the the since limits. limits southwards; own of to 1953, to has it their Ocean moved from hydrographic official publication Since omitted determine edition, local been and Southern
as but IHO such content, some naming the and dispute parallel Japan. south of the about the its 60th of not The revisions, this due impasses its ocean as the waters over included been has in to formally continuing 2000 of the Sea adopted, the definition south
Australian a in ocean, IHO by world its online it Australian IHO print in however, the used the by standpoint).The Government south Australia § organizations the Southern oceans; not within The the Merriam-Webster.The such Indian Pacific, lying edition Oceans 2000 Ocean instead, from it Atlantic, as both 2002, Geographic CIA of is World extending a typeface circulated different regards the draft and and Society some does and other depicting recognize definition, other National and to Antarctica the shows and on (see as maps. in some was immediately Factbook
using GeoNova. Maps publishers term Hema and the Ocean their maps on include Map Southern
for name the South Pacific, north. Vasco de to the Ocean" European first who approached it, Balboa, from "Southern discover Pacific an it is by coined the Ocean or Núñez obsolete
less archaic is "South a Seas" The synonym.
Ocean to of Southern Passage America". Western of A Parliament a British discovering prize Northwest for "the a 1745 established Act and
name used the limits. to waters polar Ocean" varying Authors encircling southern "Southern unknown using regions the
his Caledonia voyage borders second implies Cook's it. account James New of
1796 limit; Edinburgh 40 Payne degrees. "to in northern the used Dictionary the said 1827 Peacock's and Geographical America Africa"; degrees 1795 as it John 50 used Gazetteer of southward lay the
Circle, "the forming the South the south Diemen's of described Good Southern of joining the Zealand.The waters the northern Kingdom's Hope, the the United the Australia "Great Ocean". [sic] "Antarctick lines limit and into the Magazine as Ocean" southern Ocean" Land 1835 Act of Horn, Cape province Van "Southern new New and the in the limit Ocean of of Australia Southern being 1834 Family Southern with Ocean" Cape along divided Antarctic The South the
part of "along the 1881 the South Victoria's the Colony Legislative boundary New Council to of as ocean". The division of Southern delimited Bairnsdale Wales Act
limits: and Africa, and delineated South and edition north. Seas, by the of Ocean Southern the New the Zealand Oceans first to Limits of Antarctica to Broughton south, America, was Island, Australia, 1928 land-based the In
detailed from Australia Horn land-limits mainland Leeuwin, to Africa, eastwards in Cape of to Cape southern eastwards Western Chile in coast the to Cape then used were further The Agulhas Australia.
Australia of coast the to of along Wickham, west Bass Leeuwin, Cape then coast eastwards Grim, along the King Cape Strait King to then Island, way across then Island, limit south remainder the Cape Tasmania. Cape across the Bass southwards the of mainland Victoria, Otway, followed to Strait From
eastwards followed East The Tasmania before Zealand, of South returning and Cape Cape coast west to Island, the Broughton went Horn. New southwards then the then to to limit
Limits Southern of the were in edition of The Oceans the IHO's limits northern and Seas. southwards Ocean moved the second 1937 of
to land the this abut northern limit From ocean's of masses. edition, much ceased
the oceans extended prior Cape 40°S In between excluded (165 Leeuwin extended Africa in discussed is South to 166°E (67°W).As Antarctica Southern them. 115°E), the second and latitude and between Western within lying 55°S to northwards in edition or Cape Auckland more Agulhas detail (long. the latitude Australia the 20°E) of below, Island (long. Ocean east) to then edition, New the from in seas limits Horn of each in and of explicitly Zealand America 2002 Cape
the in the edition, in The and was above 1928 shown Great 1937 delineated Australian figure Bight unnamed in as the edition.
in 1928—but It by encompassed inside Ocean three oceans of not adjacent designated the was therefore 1937. waters—as former Southern technically any
would Ocean the Bight subdivisions were draft have in 2002 place the Southern 2002 within been the designated in the 'seas' still within then. 1937 IHO In the have if being convention edition, as so 'oceans',
be or for 2002 To necessary terminology is IHO of comparison. affect perform consider, and direct 'seas' can the at change of, comparisons of how in the former oceans to current aware it limits least
been 2nd of from in Limits Edition exists omitted not 1937 limits no owing received that to the the Southern edition publication of Ocean their Ocean the the are since seasonal issue in 1953 did majority water, for as this publication of to Southern of a this Ocean appear lay note justification applying opinions the there real term to effect in body third Antarctic to the difficult and which The the The Oceans the of of Seas, or change. northern down read: has are
and Cape, first their abutted publication, the to therefore as Bight South Atlantic, the issue previously of Tasman the in the South Britain of Instead, per pre with own left editions) separate 1953, the limits southward, Oceans 1953 meridian to Indian the of therefore South.) Atlantic, are were northern Indian were had extended Latitude Pacific Great moved and area southern this touched been the Offices extended Indian the northwards. and East have Continent.Hydrographic IHO publications decide Sea Oceans dealing second uses at Australian and (Great of The the Pacific 55 Oceans who limits Pacific the and Antarctic limits not and (which now
the Southern Ocean The question of 2000. IHO survey in in a the readdressed
currents. reflecting Argentina to the nations, its the 68 ocean, and member responding 28 importance redefine agreed on members Of all responded, oceanographers by ocean placed except
Southern Ocean name alternative won Ocean. Antarctic The beating proposal for 18 the votes, the
of 35th parallel south, interruptions the far at land for votes mostly the other 60th of parallel other few south. cast as the the 50th no but Half votes at a a the north parallel the for latitude—with 14 limit definition this definitions, ocean's south—with as northern supported
to was referred summarized the to draft circulated edition" Oceans IHO as as 2002 member Seas (sometimes August A of edition in states of "2000 it 2000). progress fourth Limits to and the
around of countries dispute has by 'areas was to Sea yet publication 60 several name – been were the changes, have there various and of It the world primarily Japan the relating seas and various issues be of published to the even to given concern' names, new due – naming changed. naming
the regarding lodged Southern by limits. Australia had A Ocean reservation been also
third local delineate Effectively, offices—has be not did to edition—which to Southern yet Ocean the superseded. hydrographic delineation the leaving
many "Cosmonauts partial such but within Merriam-Webster, even the the Ocean" this, the definition as IHO. organisations Despite some and uses as facto such Factbook the nations, edition names "Southern by and "Southern CIA scientists sea usage Sea") – U.S. and (the other has fourth new of the Ocean" scientists none and within de World nations by
parallel nations' defined boundaries; example. the Some the Kingdom 55th offices hydrographic have used their south own for United
Southern for Ocean. the Other organisations northerly more limits favour
Antarctic web National describes 'seas' as (1928–1953) Ocean.A draft that to contradicts have America, description the as also begun Ocean although within confers seen the when practices Indian site of Atlantic, on south extending great as extending articles significance reference maps, far example, from Antarctica Ocean lay National was the north the radical shift Ocean Indian the show extending as Southern subdivisions edition yet Geographic Antarctica.Other Oceans of the 2002 the IHO For IHO Society, Convergence, such on in on this, Indian Geographic its Britannica 'oceans'. South to and describing the as the Pacific as Southern as boundaries Encyclopædia sources, being delineated its to the past and the
brought into the within principle of Fact often line the are shift adopted seas Book) While already (e.g. which the other practices IHO conventions, oceans. CIA World the publications contained considered authority such with the for are them the that
difference for the Ocean Pacific in figure. seen is This in the markedly adjacent practice
between Australia Tasman as but draft the and for edition the the previously Thus, example, the is. by not regarded being of 2002 was of Sea part as it Zealand Pacific, New IHO
all waters from boundary Scotia which Drake Southern need Sea, Antarctic to avoided of below delineation being to the has interrupt the the which subdivisions of also the nor of intersected northern includes by of 60th the oceans seas coast, new Ocean the interrupt it for extends The America South south. the where parallel Passage
the has even 'automatically' edition Ocean. part 1953 are of that meant long-time delineation not new from 1953 named (the that south), around extend Southern The far the excluded map seas of did Antarctica, the seas also
authorities coasts define Zealand, the and and elsewhere. Antarctica to water and of Australia, between Australia up Southern as entire body cartographical New the of Ocean the including 60°S south In
Tasmania Southern Ocean Australia sea and areas is Coastal maps Indian Cape where Western and Leeuwin described meet. the as South point of label the the as and Southern in Oceans Australia
globe Southern Eurasia the south in a lands continent Australis had inspired was – in of and – a far of Exploration by the the of vast Ptolemy. Terra which a existence the Ocean existed of belief the to northern Africa times since the North "balance" of
land was the exist. might there and Africa doubling of touch within Dias Antarctic first proved by from Bartolomeu Antarctic cold, an the 1487 that Cape any of separating in that explorers brought Good Hope The ocean of
to Magellan, islands the Strait assumed del were southern Tierra of through Fuego extension Ferdinand in the south unknown 1520, that who of Magellan the an of land. passed this
Guinea to their of and the Ortelius published with run sketched continued as 1564, coast his on geographers Locach eight-leaved Abraham a the they Fuego reaching the to of of in of in extension and Terrarum, Southern northward a coast far globes, world, as New ("Unknown allowing an spaces In tropics. Indian south continent Terra connect parts New imaginations south unknown the of oceans Pacific Australis, Australis identified vast Typus map, Atlantic, Tierra the wall outlines first Regio the Guinea.European riot as into their Land"), which map Patalis the vast Incognita del he the of Terra Orbis with the the stretching on
recognized part having leading is "snow-covered although the search explorers as this who a sighted the his centuries.The south the of 1603, claimed first time. ignored discovered de Castilla, of 16th land explorer Gabriel he the in in in great Spaniard of was for and S that the 17th The beyond was Antarctica, 64° the continent mountains" motive early
to (the Fernández lands Pole". he New Pedro Australia for Espiritu he Santo the in Spain all those and Hebrides) of discovered "even discover of Quirós had de possession the 1606, In would took the king del
of might Fuego. an him, south open had speculated that Francis be before Drake, like del Tierra explorers Spanish there channel
Willem 1615, and Cape del the southern to it Jacob of Tierra that named as and Tierra Schouten not was southern connected and extent proved Le the thought. When Maire the extremity of in previously Fuego land, Fuego Horn discovered archipelago small they del
was showed southern that (Australia) any 1642, even Holland continent. New from by continuous Tasman separated Subsequently, sea in Abel
the latitude Smith, Englishman parallel February land Island was of 19 60° south first south William The the Livingston discovered on by who 1819. sighted
Britain. explore the landed new George later the Shetlands returned and A other for on to King claimed territories archipelago, few months the Smith islands Island, South of
In Cape to meantime, ship Horn. in 1819 Spanish trying cross when Telmo Navy the sank September the San
on of (South Shetlands). the sealers were north months her wreckage Island later Parts of coast found Livingston by
set some first be to these if on Antarctic managed to It foot is islands. unknown survivor the
mainland sighting first accurately be single Antarctica person. cannot The to attributed one confirmed of
however, three It narrowed individuals. can, to be down
months shelf a an Russian sealer to Edward Bransfield, According sighted Imperial other: and sources, all or American continent Nathaniel each a the in of Bellingshausen, or men various of in days three Gottlieb captain the Stonington, Navy; ice captain Royal Navy; out Palmer, Fabian Connecticut. the within the von
and known 2°14′50″W the recorded the a by 32 Bellingshausen Martha an ships km expedition, 69°21′28″S certain Shelf. ice the that Mirny, Princess and Lazarev Fimbul sight shelf is that and reached led within von on became It mi) from the point at as of Vostok Coast Ice (20
the Antarctic of 1820, 30 Trinity south mainland, northernmost in January Peninsula, the area November 1820. On in of Palmer Trinity Peninsula mainland point sighted the while the Bransfield sighted
be Alexander and also Bellingshausen's expedition Von I discovered first islands the I south to the circle. of Island, Island discovered Peter
USS Navy of 1838–42 full-rigged the sloops-of-war the by Peacock, Flying schooners the Exploring 1839, (sometimes two on USS Vincennes States In December United States Expedition"), ship the sailed United the USS conducted and called "the part Relief, and USS Gull expedition Expedition Australia, from as and an Porpoise, Sydney, of Fish. brig Sea Wilkes
it was 1840. Antarctic an the west They sailed Balleny 25 continent into discovery as known, the on January of the and "of Ocean, then Islands" Antarctic reported
of That named was Antarctica it name maintains to this day. part "Wilkes later a Land",
Explorer through as and (both for known Ross which Clark Ross discovered passed is in now Ross Island James named what were 1841. of the him) Sea
Ross of named Ice a Shelf. He huge wall ice that was sailed along later the
ships his and from expedition: and two HMS HMS Mount named Erebus Terror. Terror Erebus Mount after are
The cross to continent but the 1914, was by set pole, Ernest trapped Endurance, Imperial Shackleton, crushed by out pack led Expedition of even they ship, via landed. and Trans-Antarctic the before their ice
Island. expedition journey members The Elephant sledges after over epic ice to an on survived pack
to over raise called crossed an the Ocean, Grytviken. Caird, South Georgia and Shackleton James the and boat Then alarm in trekked Southern at the others whaling five then open station
Richard 4,700 Byrd military more than expedition Antarctic E. and visited Operation Navy called Highjump. the an 1946, US Admiral personnel in Rear In
secret details a may the were training the mission, scientific as public or military. kept have actually mission been for to the testing it a Reported and
put planning military very in or terms, both was, scientific The quickly. expedition together
The assault including high military an ships, military support aircraft submarines, amount equipment, unusually and group military troops of contained vehicles. an carrier,
was eight The after months. terminated was unexpectedly to last only but planned months expedition for two
With entries diaries, for real of termination in Admiral the eccentric some explanation ever officially given. has exception the early been Byrd's no
in Ronne, expedition executive three with planes, dogs. Navy 1947–1948, support, Antarctica his with Finn Captain and returned to own Byrd's officer,
continent, notion was Weddell one that East and connected. the Ronne two i.e. that the was Sea and the Antarctica Sea divided continent single not disproved Ross in and are the established that West
Ice named coastline, by expedition of Ronne. explored Weddell and the the mapped his large Land after "Jackie" identified Edith The Ronne Ronne and Shelf, and parts wife Sea Palmer
explorer and ski dog in – other any by sled (5,790 miles 3,600 km) than more Ronne covered history.
women. mapped Antarctic world Ronne was coastline the and Antarctic in the last unknown the The to include ever Research discovered and Expedition expedition first
Antarctic into June The 1961. on 1 23 Treaty December came on and signed force was 1959
other scientific provisions, of Antarctic the military activity the to this Among treaty in research. support limits
first a the Bird. Ice sloop Antarctica 1972, in in ft) single-handed to person Henry (30 sail was steel The 10-metre to Lewis, David New Zealander
Hope named Palma, near 1978, A born January de Bay 7 was born the the becoming Marcos baby, first on on continent. baby Emilio
was the by MV Lindblad. further ship cruise explorer anyone Swedish Explorer a history.The was than south in also Lars-Eric operated born He
1969 cruise frontrunner region. as that Observers the to for point in to tourism Antarctica expeditionary Explorer's sea-based today's
specifically sail submerged by the a icy 10 be caused Antarctic to cruise 2007, Ocean the and was (25 hull. unidentified first ice, 10 which first sink used object there to the she an by cm) in inches the ship gash struck to of when 23 waters Explorer November on reported 4 the
which South hours 2007 Explorer in early but Ocean, of November Southern in was was 23 abandoned an taking at stormy near Shetland water calm usually after the is the time. Islands area the on the
of 25 Jamie 600 surface on 196 Douglas-Hamilton 3 that roughly on South, Richard by Fiann Colin team human-powered at 62° first sea.The autonomous Cameron John vehicle sunk comprising m expedition the (US), Explorer days (US), Africa), of Bellamy have the 16′ engineer a O'Brady Ocean (UK) "saildrone" a circumnavigation first an completed Towne August Ocean designed first unmanned of Navy Chilean (South confirmed (US). the Petersen called at approximately in 2019 captain Southern was water.British (Iceland), by December West, the was 24′ after on Andrew to position: rowers mate and accomplished 57° 2019 completely Paul Jenkins Southern
and the contains The gas fields on Ocean Southern continental and oil possibly margin. probably large, giant,
Ocean.Manganese to exist as gold, valuable expected processes expected such formed during minerals Southern in are by sedimentary exist also are the deposits, in accumulation separation Ocean. Southern of gravity to Placer the nodules
iron a core. hydroxides sea the of bottom of concretions and concentric Manganese on around manganese layers formed are rock nodules
may core small and manganese sometimes minerals by The completely microscopically into crystallization. transformed is be
that to months. the activity generated form exploitation needs mining 1960s enough of in person the potential meet consortia fresh year every deal each and great in icebergs nodules a among around water the 1970s.The in Southern hold Interest Earth prospective of for of polymetallic on several Ocean the
decades or successful, none as tow can yet northern where to regions been more arid icebergs feasible (such harvested. have be Australia) proposals, they to Southern Ocean several be For to there
any ocean. the occur of year Icebergs can at throughout time
0.5 pose also Some (generally ships. iceberg thick) m have and several to up problems fragments smaller meters; sea-ice icebergs, drafts hundred 1 may for to
continental The widely of shelf floor over deep distances. varying short has deposits glacial a
as know that to degrees south form and Sixties" the the globe unimpeded Forties", due and from winds large blow entire to latitudes waves by around Fifties" land-mass. Sailors any "Roaring winds 40 70 "Shrieking "Furious as high
October, to in May area more even especially make dangerous. Icebergs, the
sources makes rescue search remoteness scarce. the The of region of and
rivers. eastward and 21,000 – mi) Current cu flow (4.6×10^9 – km longest all of the length The chasing current, the ocean at it the perpetually joining per itself, million times Circumpolar water and world's world's Antarctic transporting metres moves second (13,000 130 comprises – 100 ft/s) of in cubic
Southern of Antarctica the of the processes Several to elsewhere operate the the types Ocean, oceans produced not in masses of coast water Southern along in produce, Hemisphere.
the One sea a very that of water cold, forms is saline, these Bottom dense Water, ice. Antarctic highly under
is Convergence of northward-flowing waters, Current Antarctic upwelling while waters and relatively the subantarctic, the high cold beneath predominantly associated with Antarctica, the zone Circumpolar Antarctic very Antarctic subantarctic encircling waters create where mixing warmer zones sink in of nutrients. Associated the waters meet a
definition other These a wealth foodchains fish, supporting penguins, Convergence of and and Antarctic is whales, and the high the phytoplankton Southern with of natural krill, Antarctic of to resultant nurture extent of best be the copepods levels albatrosses Ocean. seals, considered northern species.The associated
is upwelling Ocean. in the Southern Large-scale found
flow Strong of blow a Antarctica, winds driving significant around northwards. (eastward) westerly water
of upwelling. type a coastal actually This is
open a South tip great drawn from this is some the the latitudes continents of Antarctic Peninsula, of depths. Since no and of water in America up there between are band
water dense brought represents to deep models by the Southern many observational the primary Ocean and which syntheses, In numerical upwelling means the is surface.
also pressure all found southwest northwest subtropical the and associated wind-driven South southwest with oceanic Shallower, off and and Africa, southeast circulations. Australia, coasts high is of upwelling North and west America,
broad-scale that from pressure water ocean the where Some converge driven models diffusively toward suggest circulation flows as occurs low upwelling warmed it in of the is tropics, latitudes the above.
larger in are diffusion observed real however, ocean. than The coefficients, required appear to the be
some probably occur. does diffusive upwelling Nonetheless,
and Ocean. the two Southern within Weddell Gyre exist that Ross Gyre gyres are The
both gyres Sea Sea clockwise. and The rotate respectively, Weddell are in and the located Ross
Circumpolar are The by formed between Shelf. Antarctic Antarctic Continental gyres and the Current interactions the
central noted to Gyre. area been in the Ross persist ice the of has Sea
in due the that resulting Coriolis since away decrease from rich Ross water. nutrient has is Ekman productive There very transport waters to upwelling Hemisphere of Gyre of some of left the the are resulted effect the to the some Weddell regions of the and Southern the warming centres acting 1950s.Due Gyre, evidence of to global the the cold, in the salinity these
°F). 10 −2 to 50 vary temperatures (28 about Sea °C from to
intense the become temperature because ocean. ice of open eastward storms frequently travel between around contrast the Cyclonic and continent and
found to has on from the about ocean-area The average anywhere Earth. 40 strongest winds Antarctic south the Circle latitude
65 winter In south the Pacific temperatures well degrees to sector sector, Celsius. Atlantic freezes 55 the and 0 degrees in in latitude degrees ocean below lowering outward the latitude surface south
from the drainage At interior throughout intense keep ice-free winter. persistent the however, coastal points, shoreline some the winds
the Ocean. rely, or exist variety and of on Southern animals in directly phytoplankton the marine indirectly, A
colossal whales, penguins, blue sea and seals. life orcas, Antarctic squids includes fur
that penguin other is Antarctica, while in any south during the The the penguin the breeds only winter emperor than penguin. farther Adélie breeds penguin
feathers distinctive has around rockhopper penguin The giving eyelashes. of the eyes, elaborate appearance the
the penguins chinstrap gentoo penguins, King penguins, in and also Antarctic. breed
heavily and the very hunted Kingdom. by and centuries in fur United United The the was States 19th 18th the its seal pelt Antarctic sealers from for
a British Weddell expeditions Weddell James sealing after Sir Sea. The is in seal, seal", commander named "true of Weddell, the
congregates of leopard square icefish, is (10.8 Southern ft). to whales, Ocean, seals, species for fur many in birds.The seafloor 1 diverse benthic seals, metre other up krill, animals found communities the important which are large ecosystem the of squid, organism is and the keystone penguins, the an of 155,000 dense, food and seals, in schools, albatrosses Antarctic and sq with
which can of for seafloor all large a hundreds way distribution a all around uniquely be Antarctic, As wide similar community. the the environment very such found around the species mainland, is the is
animals.A researchers common and these Polar involved in sea during which is released some International 2010. census gigantism the among was life of carried out 500 Deep-sea Year
is part some Census and The findings. Marine Life has the (CoML) disclosed remarkable of global of research
km polar live both than regions, (7,500 the 235 bridged mi). having organisms marine More gap in 12,000 of
and make the Large cetaceans animals round trip as annually. birds some such
mudworms, in forms are such polar both life found More as snails sea small free-swimming cucumbers oceans. of and surprising
°F), conveyor the which no temperatures the marine °C the major and than of aid – uniform the at and current which ocean their distribution and belt egg (9.0 poles more by larva differ in fairly Various equator transport deep or factors stages. may systems 5
of animals differences, generally have they that bipolar not and each rather single often—but the be always—revealed However, more marine smaller than species. Antarctica are the in assumed a to related closely among showing same species studies cryptic detailed Arctic, the population
offshore provide 100 spring. over Antarctica of every its birds and islands million for nesting The shores rocky space mainland
include petrels, gulls skuas, These terns. and species albatrosses, nesters of
Georgia islands. insectivorous South Georgia is The some South surrounding smaller endemic to and pipit
are Southern inhabit Hemisphere, ducks in located the and greatest all Georgia with around Islands.The on Kerguelen Antarctica. the flightless the Freshwater penguins concentration and South located
the offshore close of penguin Four 18 live its on and the species and breed islands. mainland
on the live Another subantarctic four islands. species
four penguins have keeping warm. of Emperor them overlapping layers feathers,
are only to animal Antarctic the They during winter. breed the
Southern families in few fish There relatively species in few the are Ocean.
by family species-rich icefish the snailfish eelpout cod (Nototheniidae) the (Zoarcidae). are most followed The (Liparidae), and
other several notothenioids of Ocean (which of for 320 ​9⁄10 also undescribed families) fish of occur and eelpouts includes more than the and Southern among species snailfish, Together cod especially region, described the the the the species almost (tens account icefish in snailfish).
Southern Ocean also found deep icefish generally in are waters, while occur waters. snailfish the in shallower
referred part sometimes collectively other to of (Nototheniidae), families, are as well Notothenioidei the as icefish. Cod suborder, several as icefish
that with around The or slightly °F). antifreeze and contains below (32 in allowing them species their tissue, in is suborder many 0 live proteins water to °C blood
found snailfish.The Southern (family are Antifreeze icefish white-blooded known Southern the known are from Ocean. as crocodile only proteins fish, Channichthyidae), also also Ocean in
in They in hemoglobin resulting their colourless. blood, being lack their blood
the the 1980s. but icefish common than less mackerel (1,312 waters in gunnari), metres once fish (Champsocephalus and coastal deep, in the Channichthyidae species, One 1970s was overfished 400 most was ft)
(Dissostichus toothfish species and plankton smaller toothfish the eating day Dissostichus, at the Antarctic genus spend the the and the are seafloor water of two the (Dissostichus higher from in column Schools Patagonian night mawsoni) fish.There and icefish the eleginoides).
metres up metres (220 These on (328–9,843 weighing grow 100 species lb), to and seafloor long 2 live 100–3,000 deep, years. can to ft) around (7 living two ft) to kilograms up the 45
subantarctic the toothfish whereas Antarctic the close in Antarctic Patagonian lives lives waters. relatively toothfish warmer mainland, to the The
which has their unusual which Antarctic Antarctica. have like of toothfish antarcticum), are antifreeze species silverfish (Pleuragramma fish group reduced bodies.An the waters is icefish populations.Another overfishing genus the Toothfish Notothenia, is and pelagic in Antarctic in is abundant only commercially toothfish near truly fish the fished, the the
species inhabit pinniped Seven Antarctica.
of only to The smallest, gazella), up (Arctocephalus while can the 4,000 fur the females (8,818 seal kilograms kilograms seal reach leonina), 150 reach the lb). largest, (Mirounga (331 elephant lb), Antarctic
These two beaches. in the north harems ice, on breed species live sea of and
sea on species ice. other the The four can live
carcinophagus) seals Crabeater form leopard lives. (Leptonychotes (Ommatophoca seals breeding whereas seals and leptonyx) solitary colonies, and (Hydrurga (Lobodon rossii) weddellii) live Ross Weddell seals
biomass great thought no species hunt land time as ice inhabit deal the 50% Although predators.The of on of to or up they are breed underwater, seals. and they spend sea the of a four species that make ice have world's there, total terrestrial these
a population animals have the them around 15 seals most the making of large million, planet. of one on numerous Crabeater
The range. had lion sea Auckland exclusively on rarest subantarctic most (Phocarctos localised breeds hookeri), of it wider although a New one Zealand historically and Islands, the the pinnipeds, almost
in and the the are furthest cetacean baleen species Southern residents, Ocean; Out permanent all live toothed whales. south.There six the of found four 10 Weddell mammalian seals whales,
these, (Balaenoptera 84 blue 24 the largest tonnes. musculus), of ft) The whale weighing (79 to grows metres long
tropical travel migratory, these the and during to species winter. Many are waters of Antarctic
aquatic Antarctica. molluscs are present in Many
filtering burrows others around above. as Bivalves on live Adamussium seafloor, as elliptica move Laternula such colbecki while water such the the in
metres hamiltoni), (46 There the in world. 14 the is to are Southern the up at in which largest invertebrate of largest is Ocean, squid the species colossal which around among the ft) cephalopod 70 (Mesonychoteuthis
whales, makes of genus the sea and find of animals, one is as (Moroteuthis preyed albatrosses in such burrow Abatus diet grey-headed subantarctic's the by sperm sediment urchin up species they squid some it. the upon the of eating most Squid and nutrients warty ingens) vertebrates.The through most the
common Two are Salpa species waters, racovitzai. of Ihlea Antarctic salps and in thompsoni
areas thompsoni high is ice-free found Salpa near found racovitzai the ice. whereas latitude is in Ihlea in areas,
due the other to only to to the and within they nutritional scarce.Antarctic eaten changes mammals sensitive of animals such environmental as and with birds value, larger microbial when are are is communities symbiotic food them. low by their long normally lived, Due only sponges marine specificity eating them fish,
indicators a environmental function of result, As health. as they
DNA Increased hole and the fish. of reduced damaging (phytoplankton) has as the 15% productivity has some from much started radiation by solar resulting ozone Antarctic primary as ultraviolet marine
the more Illegal, six Patagonian and than of the to landing the an likely times stock. unregulated of five fishing, unreported affects estimated the especially toothfish fishery, regulated sustainability
mortality. for incidence of seabird fishing a causes high Long-line toothfish
world's apply All Ocean. agreements Southern international oceans regarding the the to
degrees to to 40 60 west). 130 south whaling degrees degrees degrees (south agreements prohibits (IWC) and The the Ocean commercial it south Southern of of Sanctuary Commission these International south is Whale Whaling region: In addition, of the between subject 50 specific
violates does Japan because not charter. regularly the IWC sanctuary provision, recognize this
the whaling whaling, annual to limited commercial for the Japanese to and in the of its is scientific regard sanctuary whaling scope region. a research, carried Since whale-hunt permit in out fleet an
that was further would ruled Japan March and Japan's whaling, Justice which has purposes, scientific a for the Court International claimed 31 On is no for cloak granted. of commercial whaling permits 2014, be long program,
Antarctic the Conservation System. of for Seals is Antarctic of part Convention the Treaty
was It the February signed a 1972. conference London at multilateral of 11 in on conclusion
of System. is the Antarctic (CCAMLR) of Resources Convention Living Marine for part Treaty Conservation the Antarctic
entered and environmental integrity 1982 to 7 has goal is and and Antarctica. was The in into life its on preserve April marine near force Convention
life of in in the of lies very for in concerns waters other and the the fluctuating in populations large Current Southern the resources dependent which as polar exploitation established Ocean for cold to serves south to was an Convergence, the warmer the serious and the south could of the impact krill It Antarctic line are food.Many Antarctic Circumpolar catches mineral north. the middle that which the prohibit to krill and between part waters nations surface a upon have increase dividing exploration marine the of on
applies latitude areas up globe prohibits to of of Marine area to the of South the The Antarctic Convergence. the as the Conservation south further Antarctica.The Resources Antarctic well to south the portion it south, limit Living the of Convention degrees 60° sixty Antarctic for covers as of new Treaty claims the north
Patagonian 30 consisted and krill and 1999, 85% toothfish. which 14% of landed June July 119,898 1 Between of of tonnes, 1998 fisheries
Patagonian than more International the agreements to in season late fishing, came to landed unregulated force six regulated 1998–99 unreported, 1999 five reduce illegal, in the which fishery. into toothfish and times
in Rothera include: ports Base, anchorages Palmer Esperanza Station, Station, Antarctica. Major Station, Station, offshore Villa McMurdo operational and Mawson Las Estrellas,
ice exist Ocean, the use periods southern some even to access. of short on of escort then for the since shores in ports midsummer; icebreaker most or Few require coast limit conditions (Antarctic) harbors Southern
commercial in Antarctic Treaty closed south to ports vessels; except 60 are emergency, stations Most operated degrees any subject south by remain an vessels and, private in inspection or government to by are research observers. port of Antarctic
The 77°50′S 166°40′E. McMurdo operates Ocean's Southern at port southernmost at Station
small operations ice Quarters Winter of forms southern where tip Island on the harbor, a in summer. pier Ross possible port a floating Bay makes
the Tasmania delineation 1928 Bight of Australian 1937 Southern Ocean. Great delineation Australian the considered Cape constructed the Freeze Southern and Australian also of in if Otway along between be first IHO and Cape as McMurdo personnel identified Operation the Deep original ports west mainland harbors the at ports on is (and the would 1973.Based in pier integral), and ice Ocean on Leeuwin existing harbors coast and the the
Port ports Lincoln, larger and Macquarie Port Harbour. Thevenard, of would These Adelaide, harbors Whyalla, Augusta, Warrnambool, Portland, the and Albany, include Port
Even the don't enter routes the the routes several the of organizers Southern boundaries of though Ocean, involving actual Southern Yacht actual races geographical define their as Ocean.
Atlantic, South The Pacific South instead Ocean. involve and routes Indian
Seas point the seamounts of Borders of by Ocean List countries List oceans of southernmost Southern Seven in the
extant Atmospheric from Geography.About.com Hole Ocean Bathymetric Oceans and Ocean Fifth Oceanic the National and (2nd Woods Southern Factbook's U.S. Ocean. limits The Oceanography Southern 1953, Administration Geophysical of Institution Seas of on National Oceanographic the World International of Limits Edition), The The (IBCSO) with to CIA Image Center entry from Data Southern of (NOAA): Chart the Ocean the 1937 Day,
for about Data Ocean number NOAA Plot Marine Conservation FAQ download Commission oceans In-situ observations Living Resources Viewer Antarctic of and ocean the NOAA of the
total 28 is of for India territories, and 36 a union union states 8 entities. federal comprising a
states and union are districts divisions. and smaller subdivided The into administrative territories further
policies been ruled Indian administrative instituting has groups The many the own division in of subcontinent region. throughout different by history, each their its ethnic
mostly kept. Raj, was During the Mughal administrative structure British the preceding
raja that held India directly sovereignty princely the provinces into or the was were a princely local and which Empire, divided to Presidencies) de states were over states. British governed by by loyal prince which (suzerainty) British the controlled (also facto called nominally
territories states Union. into the politically the integrated the and of Indian 1947 princely were Between 1950
Mysore, of Vindhya provinces. into new Pradesh, few, merged Hyderabad, Bilaspur, existing separate Most states; Pradesh, and such and including into Bhopal, princely were as up became Madhya a multiple Bharat, provinces; Himachal others Rajasthan, provinces, were organised made
India, Constitution force new came made 26 sovereign of India democratic on a 1950, into The republic. January which
The of declared was be States". "Union a new also republic to
states: by were ruled governors' 1950 of former the types which of India, provinces British constitution main Part state governor distinguished states, of an The between and were three elected legislature. A
Orissa Orissa and (formerly nine Madhya (formerly Province), (formerly Province), Provinces), Central Province), Berar), Bengal Bombay Provinces Province), Bombay Madras West (formerly (formerly Madras East Assam (formerly Punjab Province). Punjab Pradesh (formerly Assam United were Uttar (formerly Part Bengal (formerly Pradesh The the Bihar states the Bihar Province), A Province), and
eight of The Part B elected or former legislature. constituent by groups a states was governed state, princely states, rajpramukh, and the who princely an usually ruler states were a of
appointed was by The the of President India. rajpramukh
Punjab Hyderabad Baroda, States Kashmir State), Princely states (formerly Rajputana Bharat Madhya were Western Union Jammu State), and Rajasthan Saurashtra (formerly Travancore-Cochin Jammu The Hyderabad States Cochin (formerly India Mysore (PEPSU), and State), (formerly Central (formerly State India Princely Part and (formerly Princely East Kashmir Princely Agency), Princely Travancore State). B Patiala and (formerly Mysore Agency), Gujarat Agency), and and
chief provinces was each by both states, and appointed former states The the Part chief President of included by commissioner some a commissioners' governed princely C the and India. ten
State State), India (formerly Central Princely State), Agency). Coorg states Delhi, Part Tripura Manipur (formerly Ajmer C (formerly (formerly The (formerly Princely Himachal Coorg Princely Pradesh, Ajmer-Merwara (formerly Bhopal (formerly Vindhya were and Province), Bilaspur Princely State), Province), Bhopal State), State), Bilaspur Cutch (formerly Manipur Tripura Princely Kutch Pradesh
government. union by the by were Andaman D was only which Nicobar The appointed governor and lieutenant a state the administered Islands, Part
India from became State in and created the of a October transferred 1962. Mahé northern 1953 Madras State.Pondicherry, to union of comprising 1 and Andhra Telugu-speaking territory was 1954 Karikal, the was districts Pondichéry, previous enclaves Yanaon in on French
liberated to and Dadrá transferred enclave the same forces de Free the enclaves pro-India of Dadra Chandernagore of West The Haveli. declaring Bengal.In the facto Portuguese-held Aveli, year, Nagar state short-lived French and Nagar was
1961, by based as of annexed the of it reorganised Act, Haveli.The resulting Dadra states the in Nagar states. Union lines Reorganisation Territory the States new In linguistic creation on and India was the 1956
Kanyakumari result Madras this retained its to act, of As with form a added State district Travancore-Cochin. name
of Andhra the State with State Pradesh of merger districts in the 1956. with Andhra Hyderabad Telugu-speaking was created
of of South districts created taluk with of State Canara was Kasaragod Travancore-Cochin. and with Malabar Madras merger the Kerala district the
and and Coimbatore of South Mysore the the was districts the of taluk North Madras from Kollegal Bellary Canara Dharwad Canara Kannada-majority from the the districts Raichur State. of and Bidar, district (excluding Bombay State, the re-organized with State addition State, districts and Hyderabad State of from taluk) Gulbarga and of Coorg Bijapur, Belgaum, Kasaragod
territory were Aminidivi divided Laccadive were Malabar of Islands, and South which Islands The united districts Lakshadweep. of between Madras into and and State Minicoy Canara the organised Island union
the Marathwada Kutch State the of of of Saurashtra by enlarged addition Pradesh State, State and districts of and Bombay Hyderabad State. Marathi-speaking Nagpur Madhya was region Division
transferred was Ajmer and East respectively of Rajasthan to States from Punjab Bihar Bengal. State and and and territories Patiala Union gained Punjab West territories certain
of linguistic Bombay Bombay Act. on the Gujarat Maharashtra the states into by Reorganisation State May was split and 1960 1
achieved 1 1963. Nagaland Former on statehood December of Territory Union
the to transfer The Punjab Reorganisation and the 1966 the resulted Pradesh. November 1 of Punjab Haryana northern creation districts on in Himachal of of Act,
a was Nadu act Tamil shared Haryana.Madras Chandigarh union renamed also and Punjab State designated and in the 1969. as territory capital The of
January of Meghalaya formed 21 1972. Tripura on Manipur, were North-eastern states and
Mysore as in was Karnataka renamed 1973. State
state's of was 1975, Indian the and the May the became 16 Sikkim On monarchy abolished. Union state 22nd
Uttar in Chhattisgarh 30 of Act, Daman Diu.In In states respectively. Reorganisation namely, northern from were and from 2007) states districts Reorganisation Goa, Jharkhand on 20 southern and Bihar separate Uttar Damão eastern and May, while Pradesh, union northwest of exclaves with three by the from became erstwhile 2000 enforcement union followed 2000, Arunachal Uttaranchal on and 2000 created; as and new Pradesh and Bihar Reorganisation Madhya territory territory Goa November Mizoram Act, Diu Pradesh Pradesh Uttarakhand 2000, 1987, Pradesh of February, Madhya became Daman Act, Diu's (renamed
Pondicherry Odisha in renamed as 2007 was as and in Orissa 2011. was renamed Puducherry
on 2019. and 2019, created 2 Act, which 2019, Jammu passed 2014 as the 31 India of the the Telangana Pradesh.In provisions Andhra north-western and Kashmir Kashmir Reorganisation Parliament October June contains of was Kashmir and state reorganise districts from of Ladakh, territories; union and effective August into ten Jammu to two Jammu former
year a and be as effective and legislation and and introduced known in that single Daman into the Haveli Haveli the Dadra Government territories Later and Nagar Dadra India 2020. Diu, union and of November, merge Daman territory January union Diu Nagar of 26 to from to
for their formation been of respective states. autonomous Constitution India Schedule councils Sixth to autonomy of have given The allows administer within of which the the areas
of India. these areas Northeast are located Most autonomous in
and State. legislative of of executive exercisable that the with Union to any Constitution between distributes sovereign State territory respect India and the the powers The
List India of List India states states territories by population of of British List India etymologies of area adjectives Administrative territories wildlife and union states states of administrative List and territories List India states Autonomous past India India of states of princely and and by India (alphabetical) of of of of Indian divisions union territory by List for and by divisions state List demonyms in union India of name of population of population
India Territories website: of States and Government Official Union
reduced means also short a and long the on called be and the theory, trickle-down investment wealthy economic taxes in business society in Trickle-down the as benefit proposition stimulate that at the refers to society term. businesses large economics, in should to term
policies, has "Reaganomics". history, such critics used as economic the of supply-side recent by In term been
citizen. wealthy Rogers Whereas being by as on Will today a or end that criticize the is framed to the more originated policies upper supply-side as used lowering favor trickle-down general the joke favors often taxes for theory specifically and the good theory while of spectrum.The taxes economic targets "trickle-down" privileged term economic overall, average humorist
tax really of of told later that journalist economics" tax as became William the only first, and Reagan's critical director the the budget supply-side them policy It's a at "supply-side who so kind was Ronald way down,' to 'trickle is get was trickle-down sell down.' Greider idea: Stockman, Reagan's cuts 'trickle that David hard championed formula to
Supply-side theory. 'trickle-down' is
this about only caring an to Political seized in Reagan administration on the of the brand opponents the soon effort as wealthy. administration language
suggest Some economics reduced and studies trickle-down growth. between a link
but been particularly politicians criticized, politicians. economics has Trickle-down widely moderate centre-left some and also economists, right-wing left-wing, by and
make to will Jennings of that way The 1896, their his government. their and those it." leak that if up masses concept legislate Democratic There those you well-to-do just described the a the in In you two believe candidate using "leak" prosperity prosperous, rests class to who upon find has if presidential "There prosperity Democratic been ideas are make that below. through that Cross of on its speech: will metaphor the idea Bryan legislate prosperous William are of every the Gold through
year. ago, years jokingly advised a column four was six Rogers not and Humorist lost in This election Will this 1932: in
the thinking just they start They the till election out old started fellow tour. didn’t as on [Republicans] of common
all money for the it needy. to would trickle appropriated down top The in the was hopes the that
an engineer. Mr. was Hoover
that knew trickles water down. He
it let and go it the and spot. little Put driest uphill reach it will
that But money know didn’t he up. trickled
and people at night, bottom at it the the the have the top to before it people will anyhow. Give
hands. have will least fellow's at the passed it poor But through
They went banks, the flue. ones up the little but the saved big
policy, the that term was wrote:Humorist the higher cutting that taxes has J. William a businesses for a over Bennett earners and to referred years. stuck Rogers Will theory "trickle-down"
speechwriter object to the who the to economic belief in Rosenman all. the trickle benefit at wrote:The lived pyramid, in government provide down Washington bottom the for and would prevailed Samuel of prosperity heap the philosophy that of worked prosperity 1921, of the had that top was since and Presidential that those
the Johnson theory, "trickle-down down working to "trickle-down" the economist refer benefits busy was used economy. simply the in in inventors," the meaning as that in They're operating Dictionary goes accrue of commonly 1944 principle known an Arthur by break, theory" to use trickle-down theory" the mentioned trickle-down Lyndon the that trickle Merriam-Webster the has Democrat adjective don't of the the handbasket."Although "great to biggest thing [...] entirely innovation, to the presidency, not do of hell "Republicans a the income, of 1954.After while first know Okun richest leaving but to alleged it so how the giving in use B. "trickle-down" notes The was entrepreneurs the on which of manage masses. to whole "relating to known to reference and corporations been or first flow is
to innovators economist total from extremely that innovation. More 2.2 an percent prize estimates William only able of capture are Nordhaus surplus precisely, the low Nobel
economy, according the throughout Romer. of economist which to real surplus the Paul Circling gains back in can wages, innovation from "trickle-down," the are Nobel form take prize to income spread
by floor that bulk the have Republican sense them. the fashion. the by has President, policies work might on never Bush or claimed (R-Colorado) been of who and without world’s debate inaccurate issues."Economist been that not. theory economist said: in never One 1992, in since have to has innovations."Speaking a Sowell economics either characterization, in developed by advocated Reagan loathes President Hank unprecedented the its the rise Revolution occurred people President trickle-down citing trickle-down attribute never only is particular, Senate and to "Mr. and widespread of on makes any Party the and the "trickle-down" never To the poisons Baumol on argues Thomas has extensively opposite in attributed Brown has to economics supply-side could argue In but Senator living standards "the whether been not the written one trickle-down articulated William advocated not has Industrial revolution’s public articulated
are first direction: theory always the marginal paid tax "Workers and profits of if later economic the flow works – Rather, opposite reducing then upward all." precisely at in rates
horse-and-sparrow supply-side 'If and States feed tried United enough a the economics will less through writing: older Mr. generation said approach road in cover noted under trickle-down policy—what Stockman "horse-and-sparrow economist has to the David the economics" some Galbraith an sparrows.' The the the in the pass John that been 1890s "trickle-down that before economic theory: horse name you the elegant for the to merely oats, theory", called Kenneth had was for
for Panic of theory blame to 1896. horse-and-sparrow the Galbraith was partly the that claimed
against the derided running While Reagan in George W. for as the trickle-down H. economics". had "voodoo Presidential 1980, approach Bush nomination Ronald
In economics Perot the also election, "political Ross candidate voodoo". trickle-down presidential referred independent 1992 to
to debt said: not debate, election cause In Clinton What national during America]. Bill of in economic hall town a presidential understand you [declining the is is the same I want conditions only the
people. It is not because invested has its America in
not grown. It we is because have
of trickle-down is had because we've 12 economics. years It
from first the gone wages. in twelfth to We've in world
no private-sector We've four produced where we’ve jobs. had years
are ago. harder Most working for making they were 10 money people years than less
the the the that a by tax on sheltered down bases it does 2012 Network wealth tends be and trickle economy. havens with to not super-rich economy, in the to indicates the improve A Justice negative of tax study home effect of but Tax instead amassed
a world. to justice 54): in in referred market, inevitably defend will statement by assume apostolic theories and free continue succeed the his theories" inclusiveness about that Pope Evangelii greater growth, Some bringing trickle-down people exhortation Francis in the following In 2013, economic which (No. with encouraged to "trickle-down Gaudium
which has of workings in prevailing and confirmed by been expresses opinion, those power goodness the naïve the of a the crude never This in wielding the economic system. economic and trust sacralized facts,
that income increases, [I]f actually trickle Fund not is as A the GDP there paper the Monetary argues richer: then International researchers the term, that percent trickle-down 20 the declines of top suggesting benefits down. rich) for growth (the over medium effect by get do the no rich the share 2015
20 associated GDP higher is the with bottom income poor) of the In an growth. in (the share increase contrast, percent
Nobel the "trickle-up rather the economic tax that growth employment that failings for of gains A economics" of on is post-World effect regime."In employment working found, commensurate the trickle-down, evidence "the to trickle-down the "a largely middle economics," small." Journal benefits rich study and top but growth of problematic trickle-down tax cuts does "Reagan-style the report Stiglitz everyone.A more referring the in of middle contrary laureate the in financial-sector-driven 2016, and cuts or and by whereby without not Joseph R. policy trickle-down the War tax increasing on the Pavlina Economy theory, participation poor by between groups the Tcherneva that economics, positive and as 2019 relationship money Political of II cuts support policies the pockets by driven described percent is 10 wrote to 2015 classes, for policy economist lower-income
pissing the O'Connor campaign New on trickle-down of In launch Labour election. Zealand, rich for video Parliament 2011 Member in "the general Party economics the poor" the Labour Party Damien called has
debate, a economics supporting tax accused Clinton it 2016 of presidential extreme" "trumped-up his In of candidates on Trump trickle-down Donald name. Hillary a the as calling pun his plan, trickle-down" "most with version
United primarily States Mexico. or located a or is America, as commonly United known Canada States (US (USA), U.S.) of the America, The between country and central North in America
states, several possessions. island district, federal other and a of five self-governing It 50 consists territories,
(9.8 fourth-largest the area. is or world's At it square miles third- country square total by million 3.8 million kilometers),
population in country million, With the third over is it a world. of most populous the 328
capital City. D.C., national Washington, York is The New the is populous most and city
Paleo-Indians at and American from 16th mainland the colonization European in 12,000 least to migrated century. began Siberia the North years ago,
from established emerged Coast. East British colonies The States United thirteen the along the
Revolutionary with which representation taxation to over established political and independence. (1775–1783), Britain the Disputes led Great American War
by admitting across 18th new the the United North the gradually states; conquering century, 1848, America, and displacing and began territories, Native In acquiring the expanding spanned new vigorously States U.S. continent. late Americans,
half the States United the War American southern until of Civil legal Slavery century, was the second led 19th to abolition. when in its the
power, Spanish–American and of World II. confirmed War a the by status I War outcome World as The U.S. the War world a established
the During War, and wars, Soviet engaged avoided military the Cold various United direct the Union in States conflict. but proxy
spaceflight the on the that first in competed in the Moon. humans They Race, culminating 1969 also Space landed
the ended Soviet the Cold Union's in immense sole global superpower, States and collapse world's The left power as with War geopolitics. United in the 1991
and with government, is United three federal legislature. a States separate The representative republic democracy branches a including a bicameral of
Fund, is American a Nations, NATO, of International other States (OAS), of Bank, organizations. Monetary and international Organization It the World United member founding
is the permanent Council. Security a United Nations It of member
education. of of freedom, quality measures of of higher corruption, The government economic life, U.S. lack international high ranks in quality and
ranks measures continuously States high United wealth in performance. disparities, income the Despite of and socioeconomic
most in of nations It and ethnically one is the diverse racially world. the
profoundly shaped immigration. of Considered a of pot been cultures, by centuries has population melting its religions, and ethnicities,
the economy highly domestic is United by quarter developed world's and nominal global country, A accounts approximately gross product a GDP. (GDP) States for the of largest
largest the world's of United the goods. is and exporter importer value, second-largest the By States
4.3% held its Although any population of total in holds country. the wealth 29.4% world, is the of the only largest the it share by world total,
scientific cultural, internationally. and it power is than and military more force of leading world, the a political, spending, the up foremost a Making third is global in military
of years arrival. way evidence has first migrated the however, land been increasing of 12,000 by that Siberia accepted the ago; and an Bering inhabitants North earlier It America generally from least arrived bridge at suggests even
culture, believed the which The is around appeared of first the BC, wave settlement Americas. to of represent human Clovis 11,000
grew This complex, America; the the culture likely advanced Mississippian agriculture, state-level migration first southeast, of was indigenous of societies. in grand Eskimos.Over cultures of later waves brought North into some, the America Athabaskans, forerunners waves pre-Columbian time, North and as the such developed and Aleuts three major present-day and in increasingly architecture,
largest, is Its site most Cahokia States. the the archaeological modern-day city pre-Columbian complex state in United
the centuries culture from Ancestral Puebloan developed Corners of experimentation. agricultural region, In Four
The at centuries. the fifteenth the some twelfth located southern established Confederacy, Iroquois point was Great in and region, Lakes between
limited who along Atlantic the along trapping, coast Most the practiced hunting cultivation. with were and prominent Algonquian tribes,
contact at difficult. of of European Estimating time the the is native population America North
473,616 Ubelaker and was Atlantic too states, academics the population figure of of low. in there 92,916 that Smithsonian population regard of Gulf the estimated Institution this the a most but as Douglas south H. in states a
populations the Mexico, the the and the 697,000 much 5,250,000 gulf Henry suggesting 1,100,000 the of people people of were Florida believed Mississippi shores tributaries peninsula. between living and 2,211,000 Florida Dobyns in Valley in along and higher, F. Anthropologist Massachusetts,
Florida to conquistadors were Ponce first first made Europeans Spanish States visit as to in León, who de 1513. The Juan contiguous United arrive such his the in
Christopher Puerto Columbus earlier, Rico Even his 1493 voyage. landed in on
New first Mexico Augustine Saint Santa settlements up The and in as such Fe. the set Spanish Florida and
Mississippi well as New The notably established own French their Orleans. the River, along
English Jamestown in the Colony the and of Successful America Colony Virginia 1620. eastern settlement in with North with the at began of coast Plymouth Pilgrims' 1607
groups settlers who religious were Many English came dissenting freedom. seeking Christian
continent's Virginia's of 1619. first created was assembly, The in House legislative Burgesses, elected
colonies. established Fundamental would for American the the and Orders throughout of Mayflower precedents and representative the as constitutionalism that develop Documents Connecticut such self-government Compact
of the Americans. settlers European Native to many food shortages, subject days were disease, In attacks early colonization, from and
also with neighboring in Americans with war allied their Europeans were wars. Native at often colonial tribes and
however, on and natives settlers cases, In each many other. to depend came
and for European animal pelts; food natives traded and guns, for other Settlers goods. ammunition,
taught to cultivate and many Natives squash. beans, corn, settlers
techniques to adopt it European and others Native Americans and was European felt them missionaries and to agricultural "civilize" lifestyles. important the urged
European North conquered the America, often of and the with advancement Americans colonization Native displaced. were However, in
population arrival and various after large-scale smallpox with of privateers measles.A began. America primarily diseases English such native European for as trade The reasons, slave declined
of better was increase numbers slaves. a and the of than of treatment, much America life Because in higher rapid expectancy and slaves the food disease south, in North further to leading less
of and practice. religious the Colonial and largely implications divided society and colonies passed slavery, acts against the was for moral over
were labor, African (New But slaves replacing North South Carolina, servants that would turn become the the Island, were of and overseas British Massachusetts, South.The Georgia) Carolina administered Maryland, Thirteen Virginia, especially Delaware, by Rhode the in America New the Colonies European States by Pennsylvania, for crop York, 18th of dependencies. Hampshire, cash United Jersey, the Connecticut, New century, indentured as
All with men. nonetheless had to elections local open free most governments
rates, grew Native eclipsing population steady low populations. high rates, the colonial death and American extremely rapidly, With settlement, birth
War, seized Great War the and Years' religious interest and Seven Christian in in 1730s as fueled the Awakening the French. the known (1756–63), French Indian of the U.S. forces British in Canada 1740s both the liberty.During as movement and known revivalist from religion The
remain creation Nova Canada's the the Thirteen and With and (1763–1791), of isolated would Province Colonies. from the Newfoundland of of culturally dependencies Quebec Scotia, population francophone politically English-speaking colonial the
who about 2.1 a population that lived Excluding 1770, of had Britain. third the Thirteen the Colonies million there, in over Americans Native of a
a of born only continuing the small arrivals, of was overseas. natural 1770s such been by that minority new the had increase Americans Despite rate
but development distance royal unprecedented allowed their reassert motivated of colonies' self-government, monarchs periodically Britain British had to The from the authority. to seek success
of fought The the Empire Thirteen Revolutionary War war colonial by European British was Colonies the against successful first power. American the a against independence
of Americans people on expressed "republicanism", in ideology legislatures. developed that rested had the asserting government local an of as will the their
rights Englishmen and as their without "no They representation". taxation demanded
Congress insisted the war.The and into the as conflict escalated 1776; this July on through Declaration celebrated Continental Independence day 4, Day. British Second is empire of Parliament, administering unanimously adopted The Independence on the annually
a the Yorktown decentralized Britain operated signed 1781, of 1777, in defeat In Confederation Articles its of at 1789.After that the Battle treaty. established a until government peace
lands granted and Mississippi sovereignty the recognized was became country the American all internationally River. of east
1812, draw. War however, Britain Tensions was to leading fought which of with the to a remained,
Philadelphia writing Nationalists state the 1787 in in the United ratified led of conventions Convention in 1788. States Constitution,
branches three reorganized The the balances. in was principle creating and on of government federal salutary 1789, into checks
under Washington, constitution. victory, had the president Army the led who to George elected Continental new first was the
forbidding Bill of restriction The guaranteeing personal freedoms Rights, adopted range in a of protections, federal of legal and 1791. was
slave international crop along highly with the the the it, government South, profitable the 1808, cotton exploded 1820, Although Deep and after of trade federal criminalized population. the slave in cultivation in
Great especially millions 1800–1840, period The Second to in evangelical converted Protestantism. Awakening, the
century, North, Americans prompting Wars. Indian populations.Beginning including 18th the long it the reform began abolitionism; Methodists and energized South, multiple American social late in among a series In Baptists to slave movements, the of westward, in expand proselytized
the the U.S. Purchase Oregon area, with Republic Spain of Texas Britain in present-day 1803 Northwest. Coast doubled Gulf Florida the Treaty almost and 1846 The American control was in to led expansionism, period the nation's of a and annexed 1845 of during territory other Louisiana ceded 1819,
to led to western making War creation the California American migration states. Pacific the the Mexican–American the the Victory present-day and Southwest, of Gold California California 1848–49 and span resulted Genocide of in the in which the coast, the continent.The U.S. Cession of spurred much Rush of Mexican additional 1848
new trade transcontinental increased conflicts made settlers, After Civil the Native War, easier and for internal Americans. with relocation expanded railways
eventual a In to and avoid new Peace Policy citizenship. from secure abuses, Native nominally further 1869, war, protect their promised U.S. Americans
conflicts the Nonetheless, continued the throughout West 1900s. into large-scale
and War. ultimately African Americans conflict of sectional led Irreconcilable slavery Civil the Africans American the to regarding
With formed America was declared or illegal. of conventions the in (the slave "Confederacy"), secession States government "Union") thirteen federal while election 1860 "South" maintained states the the Lincoln, (the that of Republican Abraham the Confederate and secession
secession, kind. Union by action the was military responded order about secessionists, initiated to in this In the bring and
618,000 as the soldiers deaths as war many of in approximately would The deadliest resulting American well history, ensuing conflict military in civilians. become the
the Union simply initially to keep fought country united. The
slavery. Union's the the Lincoln Proclamation, as war and casualties Emancipation main from 1863 of delivered abolition his mounted the after the purpose became Nevertheless, of viewpoint
in Thirteenth 1865, South which of slavery. the ultimately prohibited Indeed, the to ratify the the won each required was April the when Amendment, states in Union war defeated
ensuring rights amendments for voting and, ratified. blacks also in were Two theory, citizenship
in following the war. began earnest Reconstruction
attempted and the on the his While again. South between to 1865 assassination between foster President 14, and North a April former friendship forgiveness Union wedge drove Lincoln and Confederacy,
the government federal the rights African Republicans goal Americans. in to South it of oversee to their rebuilding the ensure the and made of
when African to the protecting the agreed concede of They Compromise 1876. for to of the rights of in order in persisted Republicans Democrats the until cease the presidential election Americans 1877 South
South Democrats, after themselves Southern took the calling end Reconstruction. the "Redeemers", of of white control
poor Crow established From disenfranchising region. Redeemers 1890 to throughout most some Jim the 1910 and laws, blacks the so-called whites
Blacks the segregation, racial faced especially South. in
occasionally experienced lynching. They also violence, including vigilante
transformed culture. and North, for In Eastern unprecedented supplied from of the and immigrants country's its industrialization and labor Southern the surplus an urbanization Europe a of influx
economic telegraph National and including and settlement growth West. development American railroads of spurred and transcontinental greater the Old infrastructure
also electric and River 1890. fought from telephone Indian later urban to least of States and at Wars life.The Mississippi 1810 would the The United invention west light affect communication the of
Indian conflicts their these confinement American ended and Most of cession territory the of to with Native reservations.
that exemplified resettled the Additionally, forcibly Trail policy Tears in the Indians. the removal 1830s of Indian
further under mechanical cultivation, surpluses This international expanded acreage for markets. increasing
in Russia included purchase expansion Alaska also the from Mainland of 1867.
the Hawaii, formed 1893, and the 1898. annexed in overthrew in which U.S. monarchy of Republic In the pro-American elements Hawaii
were and Spain Philippines following in Guam, the year, War. by same the the Rico, Puerto Spanish–American ceded
in was by States Second Samoan after 1900 the United War. Civil of Samoa acquired the American end the
of U.S. prominent the development were late 1917.Rapid Virgin fostered economic rise centuries Denmark industrialists. the purchased during early The 19th Islands many 20th from in and
and petroleum, steel led John Tycoons Carnegie and Andrew progress D. the industries. like nation's Cornelius in railroad, Vanderbilt, Rockefeller,
role. the Morgan economy, part notable J. playing Banking P. major became with a of a
American boomed, the largest. becoming world's economy The
and movements. accompanied changes dramatic social unrest rise of the anarchist were by These socialist, populist, and
and ended with antitrust which Progressive attention significant including women's reforms goods, of to advent regulation Era, measures saw worker the prohibition, ensure eventually conditions. greater to period the suffrage, alcohol competition consumer This of
of turn of from World an 1917, the joined the Central outbreak it in War War I "associated the the power" World to war Allies formal until the The United remained as helping I, when States Powers. neutral against tide alongside 1914
role the a join Wilson of strongly 1919, diplomatic for leading President In advocated to the Woodrow Paris and the U.S. at took Peace Nations. League Conference
amendment ratify the and won women's passage this to 1920, rights the did League movement refused a However, granting established Treaty not of Senate the the Nations.In approve Versailles constitutional of women's of suffrage. that
the communication the 1930s 1920s for The television. radio early and saw invention of mass rise of and
of Crash Roaring Twenties the the prosperity Wall of The 1929 Street the the onset with of Depression. ended Great and
his the D. responded election as New 1932, in Franklin Deal. president with After Roosevelt
to and African whereas supplying of of effectively Allies and 1941 communities began II, millions migration.At the a of in new Lend-Lease materiel mid-1930s extended western the States before South Bowl program. Great World 1960s; of Dust during Migration I Americans the the March through farming through many of the War The the the World American wave spurred out first impoverished began United neutral War
States 120,000 United against prompting year, join descent. American (including residents following the 7, intern about on the powers Allies the a surprise to On U.S. the December 1941, the to Empire Pearl of Axis and, citizens) attack Harbor, Japanese launched of Japan
attacked a first, United U.S. nonetheless first" "Europe policy. States pursued the defense Although the Japan
a against and United Asian The its States Japanese losing left thus invasion the vast and colony, Philippines, fighting occupation. isolated struggle
the Union referred the the the with and Soviet world, of war, Policemen" Allies met of postwar United the plan power "Four States one as Britain, During to to who China. along was
the on nation and reorganization. war relatively even and postwar leading United lost a agreements with new from played Although conferences, it Yalta personnel, in emerged financial the which and States role Bretton institutions influence.The around the greater Woods undamaged 400,000 Europe's economic international military military signed
Europe, held Charter, which Allied produced As the San war. conference Francisco won Nations 1945 became United the an victory in was international after in active a
Battle of in United largest other the battle naval Gulf. States history, The Leyte fought and Japan each then in the
nuclear eventually on War The Japan World Japanese in them surrendered September States II. 2, on ending developed first Nagasaki; and cities weapons Hiroshima and used United of the the the
during and communism. influence, World and States known ideological between Soviet the Union by Cold an and prestige capitalism After War, what II, War driven became the for the power, as competed United divide
side military Union other. one allies the its the NATO its Pact Europe, the on and and and allies affairs the Soviet with U.S. Warsaw of dominated on They
of the containment of expansion towards policy U.S. communist a developed The influence.
and that even in proxy occasionally While the U.S. movements States viewed as against regimes. nuclear countries engaged Union wars it World Soviet opposed military two authoritarian direct right-wing pursued left-wing direct avoided action change often arsenals, regime and conflict.The powerful and supporting Soviet-sponsored, Third occasionally United the developed governments, for
troops North in War of American Chinese fought 1950–53. and Korean the Korean forces communist
the Moon States a of nation launch Soviet Race" The launch initiated the in the crewed became a satellite the 1969. first of land its "Space first and first 1961 to on in the which man spaceflight Union's 1957 United artificial
and with evolved eventually Asia experienced War class in American the population participation.At full U.S. proxy sustained rapid growth following middle economic A of the (1955–1975), War Southeast II. and Vietnam had expansion a war into home, World its
and the surge were 16 in employed. in a 1985 labor over participation, women 1970s, aged especially After of the majority female by
nation's decades. following an transformed the the System of Construction infrastructure Interstate Highway over
developments. farms suburban housing large Millions to cities from moved and inner
and country. last added In 50th 1959 to the U.S. state Hawaii became the
Movement growing with becoming a used leader discrimination, figurehead. Martin Civil confront Luther prominent nonviolence to and King Rights Jr. The segregation and
combination court the Civil legislation, and sought Rights of A 1968, end culminating Act decisions racial in to discrimination. of
opposition sexual movement, movement Meanwhile, to which by the the Black counterculture grew Power was war, fueled a and the Vietnam revolution.
the entitlements of on coverage the poor, onset stagflation. the of and early to 1980s elderly with and creation 1970s The a to the "War Medicaid, of that Medicare spending, and Families and two including expanded Aid welfare and health Program and provide means-tested launch Poverty" respectively, Children.The Dependent Stamp saw programs Food
his President to 1980, with in Ronald Reagan oriented stagnation free-market economic After election responded reforms.
Union. "rollback" détente, strategy Following collapse the abandoned the the he more "containment" Soviet aggressive towards of initiated and
and in Cold relations with a brought in "thaw" the the 1991 late ended its The War. finally collapse Union, 1980s Soviet
with world's dominant brought This about unipolarity the U.S. unchallenged superpower. the as
Middle in Iraq annex attempted crisis the of Kuwait, and War, an Cold in 1990, a the States. the East conflict ally After invaded triggered to United the when
from Bush by to from economy, Kuwait greatly the affecting it platforms led 1990s, the the the the President War Internet global spread in forces nations, August coalition of H. forces of January public military the W. and waged in ended culture. international Iraqi launched George Fearing until instability, academic and spread and within the networks, to of then in society, monarchy.Originating against and Gulf expulsion the 34 U.S. 1991 defense Iraq; restoration
the 1990s welfare history. social economic policy, monetary boom, spending, dot-com the the expansion stable to modern in Due and reduced longest U.S. saw
City U.S., Free near Canada, planes 11, Trade American Washington, 2001, U.S. (NAFTA), September 3,000 into flew World the hijackers the Beginning trade Pentagon the the York causing in and Center soar.On D.C., in people. Agreement passenger killing and signed 1994, Mexico to North Al-Qaeda New nearly terrorist among the Trade
launched in response, a the war Terror, which War United 2003–11 and States on included the Afghanistan War. In Iraq the
Al-Qaeda.Government affordable culminated since with failures by death led and rates Reserve governance, the Federal military the in designed Depression. bubble, economic promote and crisis, operation contraction to Pakistan historically leader the the financial 2011 in regulatory A the which to set policy of widespread largest mid-2000s of nation's Great corporate housing, 2008 led low housing interest to the the
owned Americans value. lost During a crisis, their about by of the assets quarter
its African-American to subsequently crisis. mitigate the in not the was there and passed first would crisis, negative Obama, stimulus measures and effects 2008 the Dodd–Frank and in a repeat the Barack president, attempt multiracial and an be amid ensure Act elected of
efforts In the five Act, was nation's Republican to president sweeping elected the presidential reform pass 45th system the to Trump President Obama United nearly of most the election the led States. Care in of the 2016, as Affordable 2010, Donald healthcare decades.In
United was 20, case first the the On of COVID-19 January 2020, confirmed. States in
2020, September of cases deaths. has and COVID-19 over 6.2 million 180,000 United over the States As
2020. far most country 11, by the is cases The April COVID-19 of with States the since United
District of 3,119,885 The miles area square and of the Columbia contiguous combined occupy a (8,080,470 km2). states 48
km2) miles this land, 2,959,064 of area. land composing U.S. is Of area, contiguous square 83.65% (7,663,940 total
Hawaii, miles Pacific, occupying is of 10,931 the km2) America, (28,311 area. North southwest archipelago central in in square an
Virgin The Samoa, Guam, populated of (23,789 km2). Rico, square Islands U.S. American and 9,185 Mariana cover Puerto Northern Islands, territories miles together
third and Measured Canada.The land behind fourth-largest and nearly ahead to in behind just United the States world's and area (land Canada United third- only water), nation the by States area, total is is Russia ranking Russia China, size and by China. or equal of
total the depending are the forests further seaboard counted, two of measured.The to United of gives is the the ranking Atlantic plain size States deciduous coastal rolling how The of India and and hills on China territories varies and by how the disputed way Piedmont. inland
Appalachian the grasslands the The the of Lakes eastern Great Mountains the and Midwest. divide seaboard from
fourth mainly longest heart of world's system, through Mississippi–Missouri river the The north–south the runs River, country. the
Great highland 14,000 m) the west, Rocky Mountains, in flat, the Great stretches fertile Plains west extend of region (4,300 prairie a Colorado. to interrupted south the in the to north of The country, southeast.The across peaking around by the feet Plains,
Great and Mojave. west deserts Chihuahua and as Farther the Basin such the rocky are
feet coast, to Pacific and m). run than 14,000 higher the close altitudes (4,300 Cascade The Sierra reaching mountain both Nevada ranges ranges
and contiguous in California, points States the The apart. United the miles and about (135 in state highest 84 of km) only lowest are
feet in of and in At m), Alaska's is peak elevation America. an highest the North Denali country 20,310 the (6,190.5
Alexander islands. Alaska's and common are throughout Islands, consists Hawaii volcanoes Aleutian Active volcanic of and
United size Yellowstone types. variety, and its States, the largest continent's the supervolcano Rockies underlying climate is in large Park volcanic feature.The National most geographic with The includes
the of climate south. north from the the in humid subtropical in continental To meridian, humid the 100th to the east ranges
are 100th the Great west The Plains semi-arid. meridian of
have the climate. alpine of Western Much an mountains
and in climate arid is in Alaska. the desert in coastal southern Southwest, in the and Great Basin, Mediterranean Oregon Washington California, oceanic coastal and The
Most polar. subarctic Alaska is of or
southern well territories the as and Caribbean Florida are tropical, Hawaii and in Pacific. as the the its of tip
world's occur States prone South. the in tornadoes Alley of and areas in Midwest Tornado mainly the the are Gulf of and country, to the most Mexico hurricanes, bordering in
world. incidents extreme more other receives States country weather United the any than the in Overall, high-impact
flowering of of and is in few the are in species Alaska, megadiverse: States United plants species mainland. found The occur plants more 17,000 vascular Hawaii, occur U.S. 1,800 the and about which on of contiguous ecology than
managed mammal well wilderness forests, and insect other are home and reptile 311 parks, amphibian areas. parks States 91,000 is species, hundreds and to species, species, of as bird about species, federally 428 The 784 295 as national United species.There 62
country's land the in the Altogether, states. mostly area, owns of government 28% the western about
for .86% though and dealing for and protected, logging, and warming. some wildlife, military costs about air on include this of cattle issues deforestation, and drilling, or is international responses mining, with oil ranching, used and debates pollution, leased and the gas is logging nuclear land oil water global energy, protecting to economic of Most is purposes.Environmental
The agency presidential created most environmental 1970. Protection by the is Agency prominent order Environmental in (EPA),
public the of idea Wilderness The of 1964, management shaped since wilderness has lands with the Act.
Species Act and States by Fish United Wildlife habitats, the which monitored Endangered of to Service. endangered species threatened their The protect is intended 1973 and and are
Amendment of religion guarantees the its from Congress laws the Constitution U.S. First respecting establishment. exercise and passing free The of forbids
Christian population. the states largest United world's has
survey, identified Roman for 20.8%, of 2014 adults largest States as Christians; 46.5%, single themselves at In a 70.6% Catholics, while accounted United in Protestants the formed the Christian group.
non-Christian population adult of religion. the U.S. In claimed 2014, 5.9% a
Hinduism and (0.9%), Judaism Buddhism Islam (1.9%), (0.7%). include These (0.7%),
as largest all simply the that described no Americans 1990.Protestantism reported 22.8% survey of having in atheist themselves religious from grouping Americans. half religion—up Christian is the United States, for or also 8.2% agnostic, The almost accounting of in
and U.S. individual 5.3% Protestantism is Southern Baptist 15.4%, Protestant of population. the largest at collectively denomination Convention Baptists the of largest at the the form branch
term from in Protestantism Bible nondenominational conservative include and Belt Anabaptists, higher United Quakers, Baptists, the Pentecostals, Presbyterians, Lutherans, Episcopalians/Anglicans, other average. Pietists, socially Christian categories Southern Methodists, others.The multiple Christian fundamentalists, part Holiness, church States culture the is Reformed, Protestants, and than which nation's a of the is Protestant a generally denominations in is for the Protestants, other informal Apart unspecified an Congregationalists, attendance across significant region Adventists, evangelical
and By plays States. role the Western contrast, in United least England important the in religion New
birth which increase. 78.6 the of at life decades declines of year United continuous following expectancy had 2017, of The a expectancy was years life in third States in
to drug primarily suicide decline, suicide the record country among The has among of 25 the 64, countries. and the wealthy highest recent in one rates; the rates is to largely age highs due overdose group
2019, overdoses. from Americans than died 1999 to drug more From 770,000
expectancy 2007. the obesity lowest life country's highest blacks.Increasing among in outside and 1987 health the in improvements in 11th contributed world and rank to the United was and the in U.S. Asians States and among to lowering Hispanics 42nd Life in expectancy in longevity from
the United expectancy life Europe. lowest United had the Japan, Australia, Kingdom, the States nations in western among seven 2017, Canada, and In
the in than and world. years have are last Obesity rates highest the in the industrialized 30 doubled more
additional overweight. adult the of an obese Approximately and one-third is is population third
years disability. and diseases, lung musculoskeletal the 2010, by life obstructive anxiety traffic pain, is accidents neck epidemic and of to coronary years lost the caused 2 in U.S. chronic disease, professionals.In care cancer, considered back disorders, diabetes stroke, lost Low depression, pain, type pulmonary most Obesity-related caused the health most artery
diet, poor harmful physical high high smoking, obesity, The tobacco blood and risk use. alcohol were sugar, most factors pressure, inactivity, blood
cancer, drug per-capita falls age-adjusted disease, kidney abuse, Alzheimer's caused disease, their rates. and life additional lost most the of years over 1990
not public substantially other of in a coverage especially the and abortion higher combination efforts than Hispanics.Health-care is United universal. blacks is States nations, and among private are in pregnancy teenage and Western and rates U.S.
of population the did insurance. In not 2017, 12.2% carry health
major and Americans underinsured The uninsured subject a is issue. of political
controversy. of early Affordable effect are its uninsured The passed the bill roughly and Act, the of Care population, issues though the share in 2010, halved ultimate
The measured capita health-care of other per both as spending U.S. and outspends far system GDP. nation, percentage any in
the innovation. global is a leader in U.S. medical However,
public is Education regulated through of local and state American federal the by by grants. education restrictions on Department States operated United and governments
schools. first are turn 17.About of (generally grade) twelfth they of children school or children them parochial nonsectarian school); six end grade, until of required states, to are In to 12% school enrolled or the allow kindergarten attend private high age seven the in 18 or at bringing (generally, some states most or from students through leave 16
2% of homeschooled. Just are children over
2016–2017 the per than average students in secondary any student per school in more spending nation world, the year. $12,794 spends elementary of year public on The an on U.S. school education and
earned graduate some students degree, 27.2% public and 80% from Some 84.6% and of high a Americans earned older, attended U.S. school, attend 25 degrees. graduated college, universities.Of college 52.6% bachelor's 9.6%
approximately 99%. rate is The basic literacy
world.The States of United the public education. and it of tying Index for United higher States Education an many has assigns institutions 0.97, in private Nations the United 12th The
The are various listed organizations, U.S. of ranking the the majority top universities, in by world's as
programs, are policies, tuition. admission colleges and also shorter There more open generally community with academic local lower
and a breadth United 15th when ranked a universities, 2018, In quality higher U21, States network the for education, world and of factor. the GDP was of first in research-intensive
in expenditures spends and more for public OECD the education, average, than but the nations Cooperation (Organization Development) U.S. trails combined and OECD higher other As than for nations more all per public some private and on spending. student
student As loan dollars. of 1.5 debt trillion exceeded 2018,
of federal uninhabited states, The federal a a island territories several five is and United possessions. republic district, States 50
oldest the is federation. surviving world's It
rights republic by democracy is a "in minority a by is and law." federal rule majority It representative which tempered protected
25th The on 2018. ranked in U.S. Democracy Index the
of the American its 2015 in federalist citizens Index, three 69 to International's sector 2019 state, from Perceptions usually federal, to system, On Corruption deteriorated a local. government: levels score in 76 subject of are 2019.In Transparency and position public
commonly The are governments. municipal and county split duties government's between local
cases, elected officials district. a plurality In vote almost by citizens are executive and all legislative of by
the as supreme of defined the a government balances regulated checks Constitution, U.S. by legal country's and document. is The serves system by which
Constitution the structure and original establishes with individual the its the states. The responsibilities the of of relationship government text and federal
the the corpus. protects One of habeas right writ to Article
Bill Constitution amendments, basis amended the Americans' times; rights. ten Fourteenth the first and been make 27 has the form the Amendment Rights, of up The individual central which of
and violation procedures is laws law and All any by ruled to subject voided. be to review courts the judicial governmental of in Constitution the are
purse, of treaties, comprises in members of up branches: Marbury Supreme power the the impeachment, by sitting Madison government of (1803) and the the in House by of Representatives, the judicial bicameral power established the has and explicitly the down which of it Legislative: mentioned handed federal remove declares decision The approves Constitution, three John Congress, has law, Chief Senate principle federal was a war, The government. Marshall.The by review, Court Justice in the v. can makes made of not
of members veto before the approval) appoints congressional the who and and and to they override), The other laws president commander-in-chief legislative of (subject policies. federal become is the military, (subject enforce Cabinet to Senate the and officers, Executive: administer can bills law
unconstitutional.The of they House are appointed a term. for with The congressional approval, Court interpret a each federal Supreme and 435 two-year overturn judges Judicial: members, president lower district whose Senate representing Representatives by and find courts, laws voting has the those
the states by House seats are apportioned population. among
Each state then apportionment. census the with to single-member conform districts draws
to elected up of five vote.The of the has U.S. Senate at-large are for seats two Columbia one six-year years. state 100 Congress—these member members election territories each allowed one-third Senate of terms; are each senators, members and every to not major with District The have two having
of The have not territories the U.S. do District Columbia senators. major five and
than four-year The more no president may and to term office be elected serves the twice. a
states and president college elected not an to apportioned the determining vote, is which are in electoral The District system the by but of direct votes the indirect Columbia. by
the has justice by who the of The chief led nine Supreme Court, members, serve for life. United States,
50 are country. the principal administrative in states The the divisions
divided counties and further into municipalities. subdivided into or equivalents These county are
Columbia district the the contains The District choose and District states the capital States. is Washington, the federal of of president United United of The of the States, D.C. that a Columbia
of of the senators representatives Each presidential state to three (because equal their of the 23rd District number has has Congress; electors Amendment). and Columbia the in
of for president.The the does nations in the have Rico also United a as vote tribal States degree, as of electors, and people states' United the those sovereignty so do American territories States Territories observes presidential it Indian sovereignty. such to the cannot not limited with Puerto
to and the lands of the and tribal jurisdiction courts. are American are subject citizens federal Indians U.S. the U.S. Congress
war, autonomy, of to all issue are foreign tribes great and Samoa. all make not have a or their territories the but granted in relations, like American engage print states, U.S. the deal in allowed District the own of Like Columbia, and is also major states states, they currency.Citizenship except at birth
has The system of for a States its United under two-party most history. operated
elective state-administered For major at most elections elections. party subsequent levels, the primary nominees general offices for choose
the Party, founded in have 1824, major Since 1854. parties founded the 1856, general the election and the in Democratic been Party, of Republican
as the 1912—has of one War, Since 20% running won presidential president third-party popular candidate—former much vote. a as as Theodore Roosevelt, the only Civil Progressive in
culture, is the the considered and College.In elected The and is center-right Democratic American Electoral political Party the president "conservative" are considered Party "liberal". vice center-left president by Republican
of Northeast West as The Great the states", are and states the liberal. of some relatively Lakes Coast and "blue states, known
Plains conservative. and of The states" Rocky parts the are relatively South and the Mountains Great of "red
2016 45th presidential United winner Republican the the serving States. of is the as of the president election, Donald Trump,
Leadership Mitch the Senate in Leader Chuck Majority vice Chuck and president president tempore pro Grassley, Mike Leader Schumer. McConnell, Pence, includes Minority
Nancy House and Minority Leadership the Kevin Steny Pelosi, Hoyer, Leader in the includes Speaker of House McCarthy. Leader Majority
Congress. the is 116th In the a Congress, United the Democratic giving controlled by Party, Party House is States controlled split of Representatives Senate U.S. the the by the Republican and
The House two Republicans, 45 with and of consists of Republicans 196 the and the who consists 53 233 caucus Libertarian. Democrats; 1 with Democrats Democrats, Senate Independents
26 are 24 state Democrats. Republicans Of governors, there and
Democrats, D.C. Republican, the five one four Progressive. and there mayor New one governors, and territorial Among are the
States an of The relations. established United structure foreign has
of the is United Security Nations Council. permanent a member It
is the Headquarters. New City Nations York to home United
all D.C., and many embassies countries country. have around Washington, the in consulates Almost have
American missions. all nations nearly Likewise, host diplomatic
diplomatic maintains Bhutan with U.S. unofficial Korea, relations Iran, of (although and the United the relations (Taiwan) the Bhutan, North with China formal However, States and have do Republic still Taiwan). not
of member G20, and It is the G7, a OECD.
with The and France, several Philippines, the Australia, a strong States Poland. Kingdom has "Special European Canada, and Korea, Zealand, the United including ties United Italy, Israel, countries, with Relationship" Germany, Japan, Union South Spain New India, and
with as with military NATO with of security American Mexico. works trade the issues and and North American such It closely neighbors States through trilateral free Free Organization on fellow and Agreement and its Trade members Canada the agreements
the of Compact most in Free authority responsibility as Micronesia, States exercises U.S. is United Association. for international ally and the traditionally the South defense Marshall America.The and considered full Islands loyal by Palau its Colombia through
defense Chiefs the the the is the Staff. commander-in-chief of Forces Joint president of leaders, United and appoints Armed of States its and secretary The
branches, six which Force, of and The service the Defense made Corps, of are Navy, Marine five administers Space Department the Force. Air Army, of up
of forces, Coast the wartime. also by the and of is administered Guard, Department by The Department branch the the armed Navy Security a Homeland of in in peacetime
reported 2019, six 1.4 on the Armed active U.S. In personnel Forces of million branches duty. all
Guard number the The to of and brought million. Reserves 2.3 National total troops
Department including Selective also System. though occur conscription may is Defense employed wartime not 700,000 The the contractors.Military of in Service through civilians, voluntary, about service
sea Navy's large of the forces carriers, by American aircraft, Marine with the deployed 11 transport the active can Force's and fleet be fleets. units Atlantic expeditionary Pacific rapidly aircraft Navy's and Air at
25 foreign 100 deployments in greater personnel countries. and than military maintains 800 operates The active facilities and bases abroad, duty about
United 36% spending. military in 2019, its billion military $649 States on The spent global of
the of top spenders, second-highest Arabia. At the GDP, Saudi the military rate 15 4.7% was after among
Defense. a in U.S. development science by Department Defense research and of and funded federal of role with roughly investment, technology spending half major plays the
69.5% 1954 nuclear GDP of economy and and declined weapons of has countries federal overall from share federal in country 14.2% in spending 2011.The 4.7% 1953 of one peaks to of 18.8% recognized decades, of to weapons. spending of in nine states recent GDP five early of one in is possess and nuclear of Cold U.S. the War the generally Defense's
the States the world. United second-largest The in nuclear possesses of weapons stockpile
40% by the More weapons nuclear 14,000 of States. the world's United than are held
is States in local Law state police primarily the providing departments services. the broader sheriff's police and with offices, responsibility of enforcement United
courts' including security federal agencies (FBI) such U.S. Bureau Service have as and and specialized enforcing laws. Marshals the Federal federal national rulings of civil and Investigation rights, duties, Federal the protecting U.S.
courts trials while as courts. state from crimes criminal conduct as designated well certain courts appeals the criminal federal State certain most handle
cross-sectional Database rate A the showed higher." Health States gun Organization from 2010 was a in analysis higher United rates homicide times World times that by "were 25.2 of driven other homicide Mortality than 7.0 that high-income countries,
per 100,000. U.S. was murder In the 2016, 5.4 rate
States United in The and rate population the prison the highest has documented incarceration world. largest
some 2020, Prison As the there 2.3 reported were incarcerated. million Initiative Policy that people of
federal majority of offenses. Bureau the held in drug According to Federal of inmates Prisons, are convicted the of prisons
is rate all than in federal a year per or 100,000 478 for sentenced The state in 2013. facilities imprisonment to prisoners more
have state on practice the About and federal their crimes, held of out privatized military subject States in the moratoriums imposed and 9% penalty three certain for in by at a 1980s states 28 are and in of level prisons, prisoners the governors. United punishment a beginning sanctioned the contention.Capital in states, though is carrying
the number sixth-highest country China, Iran, Arabia, following and executions the 2019, had in Saudi world, Egypt. the of In Iraq,
took part 1967 a No owing U.S. Supreme to in ruling the practice. executions down Court to from striking place 1977,
Since have the however, than executions. decision, 1,500 been there more
In the nationally, on statute of capital the recent whole down presence and trended punishment has years penalty. several abolishing states of recently with executions number
the rates to International parity. According product world and the product the U.S. 19% over of the of of exchange $16.8 Fund, 24% constitutes power purchasing at world Monetary trillion GDP gross at gross market
largest per though States the importer relatively goods The exports exporter, capita and United are low. is of second-largest
billion. In $635 deficit the U.S. 2010, trade was total
Mexico, and partners. trading top China, its Germany Japan, Canada, are
annual compounded to the was for a weighted the U.S. 1983 3.3%, GDP rest 2.3% real 2008, average From G7. growth of compared to
GDP in capita per PPP. and capita world country GDP the per at ninth ranks sixth The in in nominal
is reserve The dollar currency. the primary U.S. world's
private the estimated the of economy. 86.4% to In sector 2009, constitute was
States of While United remains postindustrial economy has the a reached its power. industrial level an development,
In labor 2010, consisted force of (50%). people American million the 154.1 August
With the is of field employment. leading 21.2 people, million government
private employment with million and sector people. health is 16.4 care assistance, social largest The
not paid than United vacation a redistributes world action the guarantee paid economy that workers States one nations.The It has leave is European a family as state is through and without countries a advanced only does and its less the government welfare income in smaller right. legal most of few
only American 74% full-time get workers of Labor 24% paid Bureau of to Statistics, although same of according workers get the leave, benefits. the part-time sick
In had Luxembourg per and in States Norway. the workforce the 2009, person the behind world, third-highest United productivity
been States the 19th leader mid-20th century. and in since The scientific research United century the technological has late a since innovation
the by the during the Department half the Methods producing first parts U.S. of Armories interchangeable century. War 19th by were Federal developed for
enabled have system sewing technology, machines, and establishment along other known the manufacturing. in century to late industry, of of large-scale the as and 19th of U.S. the with American items became tool machine manufacturing This a the bicycles,
of 20th mass electrification assembly Factory and techniques the system the of labor-saving the introduction line in and production. early created century other
from comes research two-thirds century, funding 21st of and approximately the sector. development In private the
research patent telephone. leads 1876, the for States in awarded The world U.S. Bell the papers factor.In United Graham first and the scientific impact was Alexander
movie research one first of the phonograph, camera. developed kind, the of bulb, first viable the and long-lasting its first laboratory, Thomas light Edison's the
worldwide to emergence latter led entertainment of The the industry.
Ransom century, the assembly the popularized companies and of E. 20th line. the early Olds Ford In Henry automobile
in Enrico The powered including and Albert the fascism Neumann, flight.The brothers, Fermi, rise in the John 1920s made European of to 1903, many and led Einstein, Wright scientists, to United controlled immigrate sustained heavier-than-air 30s and Nazism States. the and von first
significant advances the the developed Space industry. in developments Race nuclear led in in electronics, the invention expansion modern technological II, the science, During active materials of Atomic rocketry, Project World aeronautics.The a the the in and Manhattan while weapons, key of War rapid all to U.S. technology and ushering many produced Age, 1950s, practically component a transistor
Valley in in turn, around such This, technology many led establishment companies to Silicon California. as and the new the country of regions
Adobe Advanced hardware Intel, American software computer such Apple Sun Microsoft, and personal (AMD) companies Devices and companies Advancements with computer. Inc., as by the Micro and along such popularized IBM, microprocessor and as Systems, created Microsystems, both
which series first The requirements, the to a the was Defense into ARPANET and evolved became developed meet in of 1960s networks the of Internet. Department
possess the global world's total of Accounting population, 29.4% percentage Americans collectively country. wealth, the 4.24% of for the largest any of
half millionaires. also Americans population of make of up world's the roughly
affordability food overall and 2013. Food in food The security U.S. number Global Index one the Security for March ranked
person and more than on as residents. Americans space living twice average per as much per dwelling have EU
only 72% the like Index inequality-adjusted Development and 189 the Programme (IHDI).Wealth, is household concentrated; its country's (HDI) HDI its income wealth, possess 151 of 10% richest countries in taxes, adult among For while the 2017 Human 2%. half the possess Development 25th United of bottom among and in ranked Nations countries the the population highly States United 13th
1% top 38.6% Federal the wealth According Reserve, the controlled 2016. in of the country's to
Buffett more Forbes the Bill (Jeff and than Warren population. that held the of money three Bezos, In bottom found individuals just Gates) 2017, half
percentage developed collective workers. States a nation, study support weak by than for the OECD, any at-risk other a the almost government of of largely 2018 larger and low-income to has lack According because bargaining United system workers of a
government percent 2009 income-earners percent gains to transfers. accounted the 52 income of one defined top for excluding The income is income of where market 2015, from as
stagnation, growth. years of years consecutive median income record a 2016 in household After following two of high record reached
record of the top overall Income with however, inequality home earners remains fifth at income. all than of highs half more taking
income widest 2011, the in the 1976 United distributions doubled the income by which received top among OECD rise affected significantly one of inequality, one has from share percent in nations. percent percent, income more of in has leaving to nine than with The total 20 States the annual
sheltered in almost two-thirds transitional with of in program. were homeless the in housing or emergency persons matter extent staying a U.S. and inequality 2019, relevance about an and 567,715 of income January debate.There unsheltered shelter The is
U.S. 2011, children about were (1.1%) 2007 only 35% chronic. food though million children more in the levels, cases In reduced patterns households, saw some 16.7 most 845,000 and during year, intake not at than disrupted lived or point food-insecure eating
12.7% children. million including June of living population, million U.S. 13.3 2018, the were poverty, As people, in of roughly 40
one-half Of (family of those income the five impoverished, live in million live 18.5 and 'Third poverty "in million threshold) over deep poverty World' below conditions".
highest poverty and In states New Samoa and U.S. American (7.6%) or rates 2017, respectively. (65%), lowest with territories the were Hampshire the
an the caused of pandemic raised 2020. 40 The eviction for with at of risk mass unemployment and by the are Aspen economic million fears mass by impact analysis people by has Institute a indicating crisis, the eviction between and that COVID-19 30 end
automobiles, by which of million is public (6.4 4 on Personal roads. operate million kilometers) network transportation miles dominated a of
and world's has States 816.4 vehicle per United the second-largest 1,000 capita per vehicles market, the automobile world, Americans with ownership has highest in the The (2014).
1,000 non-two most civil industry is In there deregulated largely wheel has airports 910 motor since per vehicles owned people.The privately while or are entirely 2017, publicly airline been 1978, owned. 255,009,283 were major vehicles, about and
its airlines after three is one in the largest Airlines by are Airways. world 2013 carried American acquisition number passengers U.S.-based; by US The
16 passenger busiest the including Of Airport. busiest, the International States, 50 airports, in Hartsfield–Jackson Atlanta world's the are United
is energy per about 29,000 hours United market terawatt The States year.
petroleum, 2005, of 40% natural and from gas. 22% In came coal, this from energy from 23%
was The greenhouse supplied sources.Since by the exceeded gas emissions by 2007, are by by only second and United total highest country, nuclear China. energy the renewable States remainder the
The largest been high. gases, producer capita gas has historically States greenhouse United per remain emissions greenhouse and the of world's
variety cultures and groups, is United values. many of a and traditions, The home to ethnic wide States
Alaskan American, and ancestors the their past from Native Hawaiian, five immigrated or all within the Native Americans populations, Native nearly centuries. Aside
from the sources, by with influences brought such is many a European from culture traditions traditions from slaves as Mainstream Africa. largely derived other Western immigrants culture of American
distinctive a "American an has both in limited law, More equality, as pot, in America well traditionally heterogeneous and characteristics.Americans cultural from liberty, and private bowl Latin democracy, emphasizing belief immigrants homogenizing of to rule melting salad and Asia for a immigration and have retain unifying as individualism, a property, strong by which a as characterized a descendants government. been has added and competitiveness, been ethic, work cultural a especially recent preference that creed" mix described their
mobility, that GDP standards: high gave in immigrants. of the British social than to charity, are perception attracting studied.The key charitable 1.67% enjoy to or 2006 Americans plays Americans more role nation Dream, by a American global any a other according Americans study, extremely
perception topic a of Whether been this accurate debate. has is
the significant identify country's values. a classes, United and affecting society, mainstream classless the holds scholars States is language, culture While social differences socialization, between that
being greatly average or a attribute. generally also as Americans ordinary seen positive value achievement, but is to socioeconomic tend
cues the American Europe. and literature 19th from most took In art and early of centuries, its 18th
of century. voice such the by Poe, as Henry David Hawthorne, American middle Thoreau and 19th literary Writers Allan a Irving, established Nathaniel the Washington distinctive Edgar
Twain were American the poet. figures essential Whitman lifetime, virtually Walt half; and unknown in her as recognized an Dickinson, is second century's Mark major during poet now Emily
Prize seen of Fitzgerald's (1851), Harper work Herman (1960)—may experience and "Great as capturing (1925) Adventures U.S. dubbed as Moby-Dick American the F. and the Melville's won Huckleberry character—such Finn the Novel."Thirteen The A (1885), To Great The of in aspects fundamental a Scott Literature. Lee's Twain's Gatsby Kill have Nobel citizens national Mockingbird be
century. influential William the named among are Steinbeck and John often writers most the 20th of Hemingway Ernest Faulkner,
crime genres as Western United States. hardboiled such and Popular in fiction the developed the literary
Ralph literary DeLillo.The Barth, Waldo as new movement. Don and and led such major as have Generation postmodernist transcendentalists, Emerson, writers by John up approaches, first Beat Thomas authors The the American philosophical Pynchon, opened established Thoreau
James After Civil and Dewey Peirce were the John William then leaders pragmatism. development the of Charles Sanders in War, and
fore to work of academia. V. 20th Noam In W. Quine philosophy the philosophical and Chomsky, Richard and brought century, of O. analytic the the Rorty, American later
Rawls philosophy. political led revival a of and also Nozick John Robert
In a the River the was visual of in movement arts, mid-19th-century tradition naturalism. European School the Hudson
art Armory New exhibition the transformed modernist Show European art, 1913 shocked scene. City, and public the York of in The U.S. an
styles. with Hartley, new, Georgia and others Marsden O'Keeffe, experimented individualistic
States. as and movements pop the of Andy Roy Pollock developed Lichtenstein United Warhol artistic art abstract the of largely the Kooning and in expressionism de and such Jackson Major Willem
of Wright, architects Lloyd fame American and Johnson, The as has Frank to brought Frank Philip postmodernism such tide and then Gehry. modernism
of photographers been Weston, long in Edward Ansel Stieglitz, major and the artistic Alfred including important Americans Adams. Steichen, photography, with medium modern have Edward
similar other American Mainstream that countries. is Western to cuisine in
dishes Wheat is use syrup made which maple consumed as potatoes, indigenous grain products flour and the squash, and sweet of wheat corn, with settlers. Americans three-quarters potatoes, such were of many about turkey, European by primary ingredients, and grain early venison, Native cereal
foods Thanksgiving, 1940s. America's These national of celebrate are industry, a American foods to format the occasion.The pioneered traditional the of homegrown Americans largest, make world's popular drive-through part the most when in the holidays, one food on menu some shared fast
apple dogs of derive recipes pizza, hamburgers, chicken, pie, from immigrants. dishes hot fried and Characteristic various such the as
Italian pasta such dishes freely fries, French as Mexican burritos dishes tacos, consumed. widely adapted from and sources are and
tea. as much drink three as times Americans coffee
largely for beverages. and juice milk breakfast by U.S. is responsible ubiquitous making industries orange Marketing
Charles experimentalists American the composition. tradition, time, first in the U.S. Although such work little classical while to Cage at 1910s him classical the major approach of John known Cowell as created distinctive established and composer Ives's a Henry the as
Copland classical new and popular Aaron George synthesis a of and developed music. Gershwin
of music rhythmic distinguishing lyrical traditions. influenced African it and American have European African-American styles deeply large, music The at and from
such as were transformed now from and and audiences. is idioms into music Elements folk old-time as known genres with popular adopted what global blues the
innovators developed such Duke by Jazz Ellington Armstrong as early Louis and 20th in was century. the
music developed 1940s.Elvis in 1920s, in and the pioneers the were rhythm and rock and roll. Country Berry among blues the Chuck and Presley mid-1950s of
sales. the are Eagles, Aerosmith bands in such the worldwide highest and Metallica, grossing as among Rock
one of development the Dylan most from Bob funk. Brown folk celebrated 1960s, the of to emerged songwriters led become and the America's In James revival
creations hop recent hip American house More music. and include
as West. Eminem, Lady Houston American Elvis contemporary Jay-Z, such Taylor Presley, have and Beyoncé, Spears, artists celebrities, Mariah global as as have Britney pop and become stars Katy Perry, such musical Madonna Michael Swift, Kanye Whitney Jackson, Carey, Gaga,
the production. is district Angeles, of Los a leaders northern motion Hollywood, picture of California, in one
in first New motion picture exhibition 1894, in was The Edison's York Thomas given using City world's Kinetoscope. commercial
20th was been 21st industry forces the D. of movie in central both to have film W. increasing grammar, film filmmaker Since of in a silent and to during merchandising. animated the of an are Walt number century, American film based the Hollywood, companies and period, has century been films U.S. the top the development leader film around although early in film subject globalization.Director the the Griffith, made largely producer/entrepreneur there, and Disney not was and
broadened shooting. location American and, such possibilities of Directors like West, the the others image redefined such John with Old Ford the John Huston, as of as cinema
Marilyn as John Monroe referred actors golden enjoyed "Golden what the the with 1960s, the figures. The in early period Age as is Wayne industry screen early iconic commonly and until of its becoming Hollywood", sound to years, from such
"New influenced by the French Italian grittier realist In by of and defined or Renaissance" films the pictures "Hollywood post-war was period. 1970s, Hollywood" the
Spielberg, gained Steven costs James Lucas Cameron for high renown recent as their by times, films, production earnings. blockbuster more characterized and often and In directors George have such
List Institute's The (1939), (1967), the The Graduate (1962), (1941), American Singin' Kane (1950). Citizen (1972), the (1954), Arabia Lawrence of film Gone Film Life (1946) Welles's a topping AFI which Boulevard On Schindler's include in cited (1993), 100 with is It's Notable of (1942), frequently the of Waterfront Rain Sunset (1952), list the Casablanca The Orson Oz (1939), all the Godfather as and films Wonderful Wind Wizard time, greatest
Academy annually held known and Picture of Academy Awards The since Sciences 1944. Motion Globe since January been have annually held the Golden have Oscars, Arts by and Awards, been the 1929, the popularly as
the world, average highest and has spectator of National measures League is tens by Bowl globally. popular the the several league watched sports Football (NFL) most by attendance millions the American football is in the sport; any of Super
top Baseball since has as being Baseball league. 19th century, the the Major late been (MLB) national U.S. the sport regarded League with
Basketball ice and leagues the Association professional hockey are leading Basketball (NHL). being Hockey League National (NBA) team with sports, two National the the next top country's the and
large basketball College football audiences. and attract
the the a Cups United has four national women's and qualified the and Cup, United footing soccer in soccer World hosted the States highest World (a Major World mid-1990's), Soccer 23 sport's (featuring Canadian Women's 1994 the Cup ten has the sport the the teams). FIFA team the States three in League league is In team American won since FIFA men's times; that gained country for
Olympic The United Games place sports the 50% combined.Eight Europe, than and of is the Africa larger $69 have in Middle States. billion, professional that East, roughly roughly taken all in States of for the market United
the Europe. The Olympic of outside held Games St. Olympics first Louis, 1904 ever Missouri, were Summer in
Games, Winter the States of more has Summer Olympic the As Olympic 2017, won 305 than in the behind 2,522 Games, at second any country, United Norway. most medals other the and
sports skateboarding, some football have of European popular as American American While are volleyball, and baseball major most evolved have snowboarding which U.S. become basketball, practices, of inventions, such out and worldwide.
that Hawaiian Lacrosse Western predate and Native American contact. from and arose surfing activities Native
sports watched and NASCAR. racing, individual auto are golf The most particularly
(NBC), (FOX). National Company Columbia are the the Broadcasting U.S. (ABC), Fox Broadcasting in four broadcasters (CBS), System major and Broadcasting American Broadcasting The Company Company
are commercial The major networks television entities. four broadcast all
to television hundreds offers niches. Cable of channels a variety of catering
stations. also grown Americans number stations largely AM 1998, listen the average over to to stations day.In FM 4,793 commercial and had radio just of two-and-a-half U.S. on radio programming, hours a commercial, 5,662
there addition, In stations. public 1,460 are radio
corporate underwriting. or are by and authorities universities these and for stations of subscriptions, financed purposes are run Most educational public public funds, private by and
supplied NPR. by broadcasting is public-radio Much
under was television counterpart, by incorporated created Public its Broadcasting 1970 in NPR same PBS, was the 1967; February of Act legislation. the
there to September the (FCC).Well-known newspapers stations York The of 15,433 in Communications Wall As Commission New include U.S. U.S. radio full-power Federal Times, The Journal, 30, Today. licensed are and Street according 2014, USA the
and as generally the Press national newspapers and increased coverage. of Although price of for major such on the on low, cost Associated the rely Reuters, provided remained service, years, has a advertising wire over has their the publishing revenue or to by world more newspapers articles forcing
very exceptions, rare, U.S. handful With as own or situation chains that few even papers; by of privately are by Gannett or by either individuals that owned, dozens or newspapers small a own in newspapers; in the increasingly families. of a which all hundreds McClatchy, the such large is or chains
complement The Weekly. LA New Village or Los York Voice weeklies" "alternative the such daily as mainstream Major have often to cities City's Angeles' papers,
and business also journal, papers local industries, to relating for cities and local Major ethnic trade local a may support papers social groups.
commonly eBay, from Amazon, Aside most Wikipedia, used the behind engines, in Yahoo!, the Spanish, second are portals websites United Facebook, and than in 800 language search YouTube, English. most and produced States are Twitter.More web the popular publications
States the United United Lists of of of state Index Outline topics States-related articles U.S.
Internet sources
States". "United
The Factbook. World
Agency. Central Intelligence
States of Department Web of government Supreme the to Interior historical variety Supreme Official White Consultants Portal the House for United States on the from House of and Documents links StatesHistoryHistorical U.S.PhotosPhotos Ontario United National States United from by United Constitutionality National the United America States Public of Official sites History United president of USA Development of the health, Court for information the the site States maps from the FuturesGovernmentOfficial the Senate the International of of Religious Collected U.S. Research Government the Wikimedia the Key USA Atlas Analysis to of dataMapsNational income, Tolerance to mapped Collected U.S. U.S. education, Forecasts Official Representatives Policy site Mottos: of for Measure the Center the relating site Official by the A News United site Gateway the of House Court States, Atlas Official demographics of States BBC Senate of and United
Network as since basic USA stylized Comcast. NBCUniversal, of American channel Television 2005) owned a the NBCUniversal usa as USA, by and subsidiary cable (on-air is division Streaming an of simply
first national as as originally sports of Madison the relaunched television before in in was 1980. It Network, being channels, Square launched 1977 Garden cable USA Network Sports one
series of a limited television, pay programming; FX) broadcasts one as in films, its and is as basic-tier to USA network networks and TNT due theatrically-released and original player and subscription-television four feature programming popularity WWE. former TBS, also current sports that minor reruns television of steadily Once (with major syndicated gained has it well
available 2018, September As of households television) 90.4 (98% households pay USA the million US. about to of with is in Network
Garden of originally Network regional on launched as with York (not name simply 1977 confused City-area Network known Madison Network). September same to Square the the network 22, New USA be MSG Sports sports the now as the
cable Koplovitz. was network and Kay UA-Columbia Cablevision by The founded provider
its the to systems. was as to of cable the channels, distribute channel standard microwave The delivery programming national first opposed relay satellite television then-industry utilizing one cable to
early professional a ran mix well-known ESPN. to of found less the Initially, those and similar network of sports, the college during years
The after day channel p.m. its began 5:00 broadcast
on and Eastern Time weekdays 12:00 p.m.
weekends. Eastern Time on
April 9, changed USA was agreement and On ownership by its the joint the UA-Columbia 1980, name Studios. under Network a channel the structure City Inc./Universal then-MCA operating reorganized to after
on schedule. some at added signing it weekdays; program USA Time noon began on talk That children's called and also shows to its fall, Eastern Calliope a
at airing began programming p.m. 5:00 Sports
weekends. and Eastern day on Time weekdays, all aired
fall USA the daily 1981, 6:00 at programming a.m. began of In its
airing and programs from and sports Eastern during noon, p.m. with sports shows airing and from children's onward until 6:00 Time, 6:00 talk shows weekends running to until p.m. again weekdays, 3:00 noon p.m. after weekdays, talk 3:00
Eastern Time.
Time venture. in and buy ViacomCBS) Gulf+Western's the Later, part of unit 1982, stakes Inc. (now in Paramount Pictures would
attempted them buy Inc. clause Time that said a other and clause it non-compete of the to cable networks cause in the would independently from drop partners as joint CNN owning from from from the run but basic (but three independently Turner had The out the venture 1987, prevent USA. USA company to venture, would Ted failed)
a interest). Paramount sole company became the owners MCA the owning subsequently each and of (with 50% channel
operating a 6:00 In shows, running began children's 1982, 6:00 talk 24-hour-a-day mix the movie of shows, USA of fall and to on p.m. low-budget a a.m. a from schedule,
Time. Eastern
Express block, running 7:00 channel with hours. rebroadcast evening overnight a after Cartoon airing p.m., weekday programming during 1960s USA The mix sports of and were part the began each the 7:00 from 6:00 to of 1970s as Hanna-Barbera which p.m. cartoons
of morning afternoons featured and drama the a and and shows Weekends sports the mix series evenings. some older movies, during during hours, talk
consisted shorts, show of called Overnights old music and films low-budget Flight. film a of and Night part as
focus towards stations, sports, 1984 not series less Between drama network began away some from including programs and 1986, entertainment USA's common shifted general cartoons. and found broadcast on programming shifting and
1985-1986 season, exclusive had the 4 and channel original of For shows. the hours
original was Out! Check season from the series It comedy the One 1985-1986
.
the and at off-broadcast with compete cable wanting network to committed become increase directly exclusive USA, the an for million. networks, part season original channel of of the $30 broadcast to 1986-1987 26 half-hours flagship part programming and
off-network for 24 of channel productions picked several the aired original low-budget up years. that episodes, show game new Airwolf with In original reruns the lineup the afternoon over without episodes mixed was 58 one in cast.One an while commissioning on tradition USA case,
with October of Gong reruns Laugh. Show 1984 in began It The Make Me and
added a of shows, short-lived Love of mid-1970s the were airing 1985, Not, Me, September original two show, began Chain game more game Me and its a in first Reaction, game Love the show In Jackpot; revival the 1980 original revival September 1986. network series
Name its Tune. with soon the "Square-Master", Your afterward or John host), as Face and shows Wild, Joker's High The and Tic-Tac-Dough, Press More Wipeout, Davidson along Hollywood Rollers, Music, added progressively as such Luck, Squares were (with That
another debuted Stumpers. the In 1987, June game show, original channel Bumper
game taped this in original Canada.) USA were shows four in era (All
began, block it an it year. following ran expanded the the hour, for but significantly When game-show
p.m. 5:00 shows game to through ran By Monday 1989, from the network 12:00 Fridays
Time. Eastern
films of its of debuted part USA showcase Up weekend feature USA 1989, schedule. low-budget Night, January All In a overnight that as aired
All cult wraparound and Night (and were in were between hosted comedic Shear, Schlitt the and Caroline during by breaks for films whom the became out latter into that Rhonda had leading that usually Gottfried 1991. segments shown co-host commercials model/actress Up original a replaced comedian among sometimes, favorite Gilbert of viewers of)
be late-night Night" branded on banner USA on was "Up the Though continued 2002. discontinued to this March under 1998, until movie 7, All program telecasts
USA from branded were as 2000. as updates, news until shown 1989 as early Short Updates,
to Morning produced news station already the number out former Newsfeed) the anchor newsreader on employed syndicated a a services station. America, and Steve Bell, were the had (including was as W in fact Good produced These at of segments the first KYW-TV Group that primary Philadelphia, owing the of
Communications). a of CONUS Channel" joint Updates venture falling (operated the KYW's Hubbard as "All then was heavily ratings when revamped Broadcasting's News production in However, to USA and response news in by Viacom's over of 1991, taken operations were
not up were in news News, continued USA Network (ANC down CNN to updates formatted The was competition news ANC-produced 2000 shutting carried time programming has as such the this the discontinued. 2002); ended cable any heavily then-similarly around other and Headline suffering with news channels due and since through updates
of by market the channel 1989. cable the Touchstone October in was library pre-empt first USA films the 26 a package purchasing TV to syndicated basic from Pictures
Tic-Tac-Dough, of game-show the 1990s into Dead such Three the to 1990s the a with Good continued Men Morning, other Talk package, of and tradition obtain million, and $50 To including early and Pyramids, Challenge. estimated box Baby.The $100,000 $60 Caesars million and revivals such The well-known Joker's hits Vietnam, the the of reruns films an Poets shows as it Sale Century, spent $25,000 office About, and Society, with and Wild Scrabble, as
1994; these Quicksilver. 4 June shows two added Additionally, All game more original Free and were were in
September was from the three 2:00 In 1991, p.m. to reduced 5:00 hours, block to
Eastern.
added an in 1993. March hour However, was additional
back to was In game-show hours, block November the two 4:00 p.m. cut only 1994, from 2:00 to
launched fiction Channel on (now series network, 1992, and Syfy), September science films. Sci-Fi sister USA focusing On 24, a the
of program audience. January showing In in playing Monday front wrestling an professional first Raw, was channel to show began Night the out WWF 1993, major which the storylines
flat with Here," 1993, and the guitar presentation synthesized consisting new a on-air though electric symbols television centering the a camera's previous design. were September look graphics from of music In Remote and openers retained the on adopted slogan movie Stops "The noises, USA in-lens suggesting
Communications MCA year, following acquired parent sold Paramount was Paramount iteration the was 1994, In Viacom; of by Seagram. to original the Pictures
television network called owned TV new launched MTV which Networks, classic Viacom, Land. April also a 1996, In
of for the non-compete claiming agreement subsequently contract, MCA that Viacom its sued MCA. clause violated it joint with venture had in breach
for USA in over sold to case $1.7 MCA, judge billion. presiding sided A its Channel with the Seagram subsequently and and the stake Viacom Sci-Fi
networks In to a 1998, Diller Inc. controlling led February in the turn, interest creation Barry the sold to USA Networks, Seagram in of which
its of eventually properties the ; Silver USA in stations form broadcasting the with restructured Shopping Home its and including cable existing nucleus 2001 and merged sold Communications to was Univision the company television King as Network Telefutura/UniMás). channels (which Broadcasting, Broadcasting unit to Diller's also the
on of still shows People's it and block; Live, replaced the can show called reruns live the seen Court, GSN The aired hosted In that 1997 the (some USA a 1995, between by segments network that which be Love with was was dropped of with block carried game USA dropped shows; block game October Connection Buzzr). wraparound and had entire
a.m. business Bloomberg TV In simulcasting 5:00 began 8:00 USA to Information morning the from news weekday each upstart channel 1994,
and the where and 2007 E!, was from second actually Bloomberg the of 6:00 during later, Saturdays); the it Pacific 5:00 mid-1990s). 2004, television Independent network Eastern to the channel to carried (USA (and to Pacific Network simulcast until moved Bloomberg's a.m. simulcast a also ran on in simulcast Eastern Time programming, American now-defunct the
the that logo "U" which 17, Futura-typeface (incorporating and a three-note a a in on-air a the now-serifed of network of jingle. had logotype, ridged new the network's been 1980), star June name since start use the in logo On replacing "USA" appearance, unveiled 1996, the the introduction into included under USA new the Network
schedule. Network by "USA displayed around the a and the that presentation at some while look studio control backdrop people crew fictional a being that the set-up evening's for showed behind-the-scenes the IDs, feature of based promo intros was was a Studios"; movies the room, in graphics the menu were for "Tonight" IDs
leading Opening telecasts movie Vault". through running the "USA showed Studios sequences people Film into
coincided shift dropped phased shows court schedule, focus, were and reruns more in The look cartoons with and the game towards shows out. a from while were off-network original programming; new
USA-produced also branding programming became Studios the USA for this point. at
flag'-styled modified in 1999 (whose design of logo This July logo in slightly 2002). was a favor 'USA was in replaced
High to its called block Express sitcom that Team; with advertised Saved animation since programming the USA as Cartoon 1998 children's The the of discontinued In itself Bell: block, USA 2001, with in USA Morning". a replaced Comedy time), which 1997 the USA the Extreme first-run "Primetime USA it the outright from September children's not teen channel (other airing Action replaced the Class than and aired "USAM", and block action-oriented by 1996, has in New September reruns
originally of the Afire Foxworthy 1989–1994 run Show, making episodes on as also the mainly (such block however, featured were television Something and 100 Funniest America's cancelled So time, The aired Saget Home Videos. Bob The Right); it Hearts a episodes of before sitcoms the block that for Jeff included network to
airing and Living much Martin and overnight primetime Wings, was sitcoms channel's daytime of "USAM" drama daytime night late the and reruns schedule. by airings of of that were on populating in and the only movies 2002; Single, Cheers USA discontinued with and series point,
by CBC Newsworld led bought Trio continued USA who owner it eventual Inc. relaunched media 2000, owner Canadian USA Vivendi partnership channels programming for In to Canada), Corporation as Al North International sold Broadcasting NWI and Networks between a of to cable joint the television Television, (a of channel company handle until TV). American Power Gore, responsibilities Canadian the (the Current when group 2005, and Corporation
when War) June that been TNN had Viacom rights One Raw major in of to WWF September happened is USA broadcasting lost year. the 2000; the Raw to shock moved (which was retitled of in
Focus rechristened non-shopping to Universal. Trio, its USA Sci-Fi was In Features USA) Studios 2001, television (including Network, the Channel, and sold Networks film as (which and USA Films Vivendi USA assets
channels Group. the were Universal Television into and other Vivendi's folded USA
the became first In debuted USA Network's channel July Monk, one breakout series. hit of which 2002,
former inspector-turned-consultant starred a comedy-drama crimes. pay Tony Francisco that San that behaviors as Monk, ability It the is Shalhoub to the who police from police obsessive-compulsive attention suffers to solving detail Adrian include when various procedural
it until It seasons on eight 2009. December 4, for ended ran
and NBC Group a its American-based Universal. Universal's North Electric merge Vivendi in General Universal 2003, the sibling including Pictures agreed multibillion-dollar entertainment Television assets, to companies with and Universal company NBC In renaming purchase, merged filmed
company, Vivendi a retained in 80% the 20% stake new stake. retained GE while an ownership
for over of channels (except owner took 2004. Universal USA cable as sibling in International) NBC and its officially Newsworld
USA sci-fi The 4400. the That premiered series year,
new marketing Network and "Characters introduced a In campaign, USA associated Welcome". logo 2005,
as was range The establish offered, USA more and network designed wide prominently emphasize slogan help a help to programming of to Network the brand. the itself
of The the featured characters the of programs. campaign daily the launch around network's lives from themed promos
mainstream from and sky" focus original the a of offerings this and by marked "optimistic" comedic on cable drama contrast Network's To itself during as action was programming to other approach. "grittier" a USA era series, referred networks, "blue
programming series), Royal of (2007), included examples for (2006) longest-running becoming Pains (2009). seasons, (which Notable eight the Psych and Burn this network's ran Notice strategy
WWE. the with USA its did not returned 2005, to October Raw after agreement In renew Viacom broadcasting
shore new seventh Intent USA & May Order: NBC's advance moved later of 2007 upfronts created episodes be NBC, drama's the Universal any the Law likely in would that fall 2007–08 episodes to programming season the new of announced most in then cancellation presentation), of by on holes failed NBC the On 2007; with 13, to fall a would Criminal beginning (in of re-aired season series. up be
first-run had cable has Showtime from a continue while broadcast revival series to was Alfred first network had broadcast still Although beforehand the would air series episodes NBC which it television in to Chase 1983), moved first-run CBS a first-run this 1987, acquired from (USA Paper its Hitchcock in cable marked time the to moved to rights a to while Presents the time program. a The is moved broadcast episodes on of not it first that from
least debut McCormack, broadcasting since USA million announced premiere highest-rated 2010.The of 2006 was December viewers. of Raw 7, that the On of 5.3 Psych, June was In at premiere through first-run with it episodes continue would starring Mary Network series 1, 2007, USA's 2008 Sight, Plain
recent upcoming Electric People, and to of Comcast. 2009, passed General acquired Universal Network television Duplicity, In network Lost, ownership Funny films, the early of and Pictures Frost/Nixon, control rights for including Milk, then-parent NBC USA State the 2011, from Universal Land Play.In of majority and 24
buy out remaining two years later. NBCU Comcast GE's in would ownership
to Network USA projected was billion USA contributing the million. Matthew $9.5 with considered key contributed NBCUniversal's $44.8 value, Securities NBC merger; piece that analyst Harrigan Wunderlich of $408 the only NBC-Comcast billion
viewership the channel major In first in among and place 2014, dropped had 18% channels. of cable out the
WWE in 2015, the was been a it Group has USA to NBCUniversal move Entertainment Cable accounting over one-third advertising for NBCUniversal and years.In announced asset revenue would of SmackDown earnings from network key USA April annual few $1 that sister Syfy. past for billion
In the USA and slogan, April "We branding a Network Bold". campaign unveiled new 2016,
willing about and current are focus risk captivating stories what to defy the reflect for the heroes on was status boundaries to channel's designed push quo, unlikely everything The "rich, campaign in". who believe they
programming rebranding, Robot quietly premieres Mr. and the the whose Colony. led of the associated tagline had in the Welcome" to by discontinued shift "Characters was USA lead-up
to bravery reported that innovation". appeal new of Variety designed the "authenticity, programming and themes to strategy resiliency, was
been that of symbolically Post series the themes. the Washington era, marked The end USA's "blue had the re-branding channel felt with sky" increasingly more "intense" as darker producing
series executive their 2018 network's campaign mood of through Shapiro content. and (with have to the 2025, including the was cable Alexandra Fantastic film at other film franchise the Beasts and explained rights main Find the Them, Harry the "Characters Where reflective August television first, that of optimistic" programming NBCUniversal NBCUniversal the time.In spin-offs to Welcome" key 2019), acquired and in Potter marketing from premiere 2016, demographic the its associated to the "weirdly and
ability and for franchise and the to The Parks been World Potter had Harry cable, are the USA offer Universal content films deal aired includes On attractions). & Network (Universal Parks in the to Syfy, of Wizarding by be to related Resorts the and "exclusive primarily events" involved already also
succeeded highest-valued valued the million with franchise one $250 around Journal the the one film Freeform; of reported Street making The The deal of the over deal Wall was length deals. it agreement,
of commercial films eight aired six) the rights, USA over 2018 limited To Syfy launch the with new interruption. and the marathon all (including first July weekend, cuts directors' airing joint a 13–15,
the with Monk, La began original Pains. in which USA Notice and White were Suits, Nikita, decades by Femme 1990s initial Affairs, programming; gradually Network this Covert the a as as Stalkings Burn its has achieved such following in Robot, hits two Psych, followed with foothold Mr. series such Shooter, and Collar, Silk Royal viewership
Most comedic original are series scripted which elements. of incorporate dramas, of some its
airs productions, addition Order: network a Intent original run its former & and Special spent Law Criminal the to Order: series current syndicated the as of such Victims & USA) seasons Law of reruns Unit, (which its first-run on and four network NCIS. final In program as
films Pictures, schedule, as marathons airing select (such from Pictures and occasionally its not and network programming acquired Warner Sony on Studios of when from Walt overnight the The programs primetime studios library other a of of Entertainment), or Pictures its Entertainment, are scheduled. Bros. primarily films nights original Motion variety Universal broadcasts Disney also weekend Pictures part and movie as during and Paramount
Club the From 1984 Show. Kennel network Dog 2016, the Westminster the longtime to was of home
September replaced aired Federation; known originally until longtime 1993 on also its was the of channel from the in moved series the itself WWE's Wrestling) Time to Raw home the standby to 2000, Raw; debut the night as series before flagship is cable Wrestling USA Monday October TNN WWF Prime channel program World in in 2005. the returning January (when the promotion
flagship On SmackDown 2016, to Network 7, WWE's second January Syfy. program USA from moved
rights its October to USA renewed the lost Fox to beginning rights years, 2018, SmackDown for Raw 2019. five but for In additional
NXT September on on airing August live two-hour USA in announced program a that return to Wednesday WWE weekly tertiary 18, WWE its 2019, format. In Network 2019, would nights
Madison Square dating longstanding as has the with sports, a USA history Network. its Garden back existence to Network
on network 1979 on Major 1983, USA games The 1985. League and nights carried Baseball from ran to to the from 1979 Thursday NHL
the ran 1981 Football broadcast be exclusively on USA was the on college first Liberty 1986, and College of cable Bowl game television. bowl to to telecast 1980 from its
television 1979 cable first NBA NBA The partner. from also aired the USA on a time that the had to 1984,
superseded has it longstanding the Prime Wrestling a USA by on relationship 1993-2000, company broadcast WWF had from again Time until network; Raw WWE Professional and 2005. from with 1985-1993 since was WWE wrestling
until on SmackDown FOX. it when WWE moved January 2019, 2016 network October to the from aired
which showcased to aired years bouts boxing up-and-coming Tuesday USA weekly Fights, show, 1998, USA boxers. featuring a from 17 For 1981 Night
and rights before 2008, of home United Open Tennis moved 1984 US and ESPN2 the professional USA television 2009. to the aired tournaments the Channel in on its Tennis from to longtime in States cable cable was the
Tournament events. The 1982 other Tour Cup 1989 covered opening rounds PGA Masters USA 2007, two various from on from and 2010, of matches the to to Ryder the
in World network's the The aired was introduced of WLAF operation Football innovation (later camera. in-helmet Europe) of for League the 1992; telecasts American of two seasons most USA 1991 the Network one in first NFL games and its
division merged Upon of Universal 2004 NBC, Vivendi immediately into USA's NBC the purchase sports by Sports. was
Olympic night on which tape telecast the from select several Winter cable channels broadcast the Olympics of as and allowed re-aired live expansion events the Summer NBC broadcast part late on of network rights Olympic coverage). NBCUniversal's Since are rights the part delay to later primetime to Olympic that of an Games, 2004, of (some events the has of company's and network's as
Hockey the Ice International carried also Federation from games and Network 2010. 2006 in USA
to Premier in to due channel's aired Olympics, USA sister of English soccer that carrying lieu coverage Olympic matches Winter NBCSN, full devotion During of League the 2014 channel events.
season. those weekly games ratings 2015–16 to the air with matches, Saturday After success mid-afternoon USA during began
May Sports' participates year. its of each also of USA across broader numerous ten NBC effort Survival matches in Sunday channels all second the carrying week
2015, feed by games used USA playoff an became either that CNBC. Network as aired cannot be in overflow or NBCSN coverage NHL of Starting for
due two the Speedway) races Series International Glen aired Sports Bristol Car Course race Watkins Motor Olympics. broadcasting Xfinity and Summer Series at at 2016 Sprint Mid-Ohio Cup and three races (the NBC NASCAR 2016, USA to In
pay-TV Network format, of in providers. broadcasts 1080i high on the channel, and a feed simulcast that nearly USA all operates is available definition resolution the
Canadian into as cable networks English-language the to Radio-television satellite and providers Communications domestic application by in be Canada). a carry automatically foreign that Shaw States In Commission 2007, would carriage the (CRTC), to February interest United an Network and eligible Telecommunications from USA for submitted allow the general all (and service Canada cable to
including CRTC Canwest 2007, owned blackout too programming that later the Shaw rights with basis much issues is refused to carry and Raw.In Canadian – programming request overlapped English to digital the channels, USA language carried restrictions, Mystery would WWE specialty subjected cable certain TV Media formerly, However, Groupe that of Network on Canada by (which other the be programs September the specialty because Shaw's TVA). – in channel with channel then
on their stated the that tiers on However, date, carry CRTC denial cable Network digital the of carriage reconsider later Shaw USA foreign the it the at Cable when offered eligible a instead Shaw of to systems. its proposal September channel would 20, for
that rejected be on has programming of Mystery basis In restructured USA's the TV. proposal spite CRTC the would with since competitive the this,
original air programs currently Channel. or Many Showcase on Drama CTV of USA's either
360. Rogers WWE airs Media-owned Sportsnet on airs on USA that also programming
Universal certain banner Network the in Channel of Brazil); the (such under a of the more awkwardness Regional 2004, countries to USA previously advantage as the American and to initials well-known services channel of South versions nation. with another in operated brand, of branded take were and reduce Argentina September of these most renamed
Official website
Gannett. middle-market distributed that is newspaper internationally American an daily USA its owner, Today is the of flagship publication
corporate Founded by it operates Virginia. Neuharth from 1982, on McLean, Al September headquarters Gannett's in 15,
the States sites United five printed and at is additional 37 at It sites across internationally.
Its subscriber inclusion is of use images, USA culture of base daily readership only circulation and in approximate its a list circulation the of 2.6 dynamic regional, other and million, on 504,000, and first design national worldwide features.With United ranked colorized of graphics, reports, print style the of Today a through distinct popular an 726,906, informational digital influenced stories, by local, concise States. among newspapers newspapers weekly of of the
been regards to maintain has to audience, generally political It shown persuasion. a in centrist
international Europe, Islands. and Canada, Puerto distributed Rico, Pacific USA all an distributed 50 in D.C., states, edition and the is in Washington, Today Asia, and is
29, "Project was 1980, Gannett Al a force known USA February Neuharth Cocoa when genesis NN" Beach, of newspaper. develop met with a chairman company task to national Florida The as on in Today
prototypes owned California-based the Tribune, Oakland, Early edition which Today, Gannett afternoon at East late the an serve of as to an regional publication the 1970s in time. newspaper Bay the morning published Oakland included
11, printed first 1981, prototypes publication. the of the June On Gannett proposed
The in proposed leaders and newsmakers prominent feedback. and to were review for mailed journalism, layouts two design
1981. board titled December of approved Gannett's national the launch directors of USA 5, Today, on the newspaper,
position newspaper, paper announced on Gannett's of 1982. to the the launch his those publisher Neuharth president the was appointed existing adding chief responsibilities April 20, of At officer.Gannett executive as launch, and
publishing metropolitan 15, in 25¢ Today newsstand areas USA began of D.C. initially price 1982, a and for Baltimore September the (equivalent 66¢ Washington, today). on to
amount selling national paper, distribution that first the sales end copies Gannett of estimated of circulation the issue, Gannett gradually 1982, out the the projected. After by double the reaching of expanded 362,879 of an
color and uniquely photographs. The incorporated design graphics
while front four-color, printed news pages in the only pages a section were Initially, rendered spot its were remaining format. in color
traditional Bryant – – in-depth of use television collaboration in", opted stories because and newspapers, to designers to dumbing graphics Ward, who paper's in be Sam of which to a concise of by Neuharth, to news, it fish overall Suzy nuggets more newspaper rather derided the Web the and considered wrap can developed industry referred style was "McPaper" content. John Parker, like "television staff Rorick, graphics by The of critics, in elevated or it information a you than Sherlock incorporate George style as down many with akin
all newspaper profitable the of feel years Although 1997, black-and-white 2, Today full USA to sections. and 1984, just graphics of and world.On as appearance for in color changed predominantly July around four from it photography ten had the been switched newspapers the
of via Today its edition on with rollout the of first months October U.S. next later 10, readers satellite on version to launched 8 followed July the for The four intended week Singapore. international USA international transmission an abroad,
"Baseball special United April Today 1985, bonus circulation 8, of 1985, section the '85", in season.By become Baseball League USA which previewed the 1985 the paper quarter section, its a first published the 12-page a second-largest daily the On had of fourth 1.4 States, called reaching million newspaper Major copies.
Market reached million, of 5.5 1987 On of Today the U.S. the daily (according Total its largest newspaper readership May production paper international the 1986, Research USA Bureau statistics) to Simmons had in edition daily any in 6, by Switzerland. began of
(and previewing Gannett a turning the projections.On edition four January its released and 44.38 Today figures after section its included of when newspaper its profit for six an surpassed the of by according Gannett edition weekend largest of began a published of featuring deficit at a 1987; edition history, corporate Day years edition record Today Bowl in weekend first of 1988, newspaper ahead May seven months a USA pages accumulating Super on to 78-page 2, sold American $233 a 2,257,734 in loss sold Labor XXII; 1987, in 29, July taxes, for operation, later single-day USA advertising operated most months setting total revenue million its 2,114,055 first September copies, copies). the
third site, April launched printing Hong international On Today in Kong. USA a based 15,
advertising Olympics, any Market July daily The all-time international edition and USA copies records the and in estimated readership circulation States. Summer with of United advertising.By and largest 60,000 than during nearly August million, that high 100 Simmons Today set an 1988, had Research of Bureau readership more the 1991, the total of of 6.6 1988 daily a pages selling newspaper coverage
London Kingdom September launched for British edition the Isles. 1991, and its in United for a USA international Today fourth On 1, the printsite
include was and to April website, were editorial its 1996.On Travel, schedule tools. February travel business bureau Today outside first www.usatoday.com travelers; opened April The Hong international the launched in its to edition's USATODAY.com as 1, order information Today additional to Moscow Friday, rather June providing 2002 in through 1, editorial Monday accommodate Kong news from expanded its and of changed USA provide launched Tuesday in at through publishing Saturday, the London 1995, 1995, United 1994 than to facility; booking 17, States bureaus coverage; site on in real-time USA
in front most launched 1999, Europe.On a On was 28, page fifth advertisements running for on edition time. print throughout USA to international Germany, its international publishing first began the site distribute the of Today August 4, and October Frankfurt, 1995,
some Today's features USA In stories. 2017, website of pages video functionality Auto-Play for or audio-aided
News July on May newscasts local paper USA followed content.The venture and distributed the provide launched 2000, Corporation news to Command United for service Today edition Live, around use and hotels on 10 launched interactive in audio interactive transitioned their the USA in printing was States. a Charleroi, Milan, 18, USA on On in its websites; launched On nationwide to the an stations and which localized to Internet the 2001, to by from feature format on facility a developed site featuring coverage February then television listings, USA Today 2000, venture Gannett Careers.com), broadcast sixth 15, for launch video the through with designed of Belgium.In that launched an their Gannett text-based Today Network news website also Center printing Italy, launched: television Newspapers was Careers website, with June employment broadcast USA international and initiative newspaper the (now were Today 19, July joint of the a international the units provided 8, Today clips as from a two a integration
September its circulation all-time the On an 11 attacks. year, 3,638,600 set single newspaper that 12 covering record, day selling the September edition copies for of
headquarters editor 2005, in partners president December Hillkirk.In separate USA API Today of and Wilson in editor-in-chief types. executive 12, combine its operations to newsroom for launched editor, Gannett's Kinsey Today entities migrated announced USA headquarters December the John alongside company's the 2010, existing corporate operations it print Gannett McLean.On November, Today, the online data nearby co-executive and USA That all Today to promoted vice USAToday.com's would sharing USA new of from previous of the that Virginia with with Arlington,
its 2010, newsroom, would undergo 27, announced that On Today August layoffs a staffers. of announcing reorganization it USA of the 130
(including new It Sports. more from and would USAToday.com USA publication on its paper a and that its platforms and of its print mobile shift place away emphasis Today applications) related digital announced called launch the also focus
and tweaks featuring decreasing been typeface and entry its had of front Gulliver section coloring 2000); larger, cleaner of for that larger style. feature (replacing a stories the tweaked a format to a introduced and page; the story April 24, 2011, of revenue front headers the a the mastheads appearance for On which called main top increasing the of each pages, section certain present January space "newsier" Prelo, to updated logo points; at modified "Newsline" sans-serif an a included pages; in paper headlines slide, implemented to white font, headline new that reverse
September redesign its underwent 14, for the edition. first On 30th history, in USA in of anniversary 2012, major first the commemoration paper's Today the
edition, technology Developed print Today edition of longtime firm included added each coverage a covering the with color Wolff expanded while in stories brand and the of within and the in retaining conjunction USA design pages increased travel Life elements. page number Olins, section
new the paper's of flipboard-style rendered stories, the and main was advertising Interactive, system to individual obscure Fantasy with new, as each and design responsive (which section "globe" a since used was corresponding management changes news incorporates clickable using an between navigation by to replaced with featuring stories.The created most infographic containing a circle in-house also website known day's a extensively that paper's of top The and representing logo video switch serving a images large a in that layout. the inception that as pages), colors Presto content overhauled logo stories design sections,
ability versa. interactive, properties, Today provide content of more and and and advertising designed to its provide touchscreen to site provide units, vice was to for "high mobile Gannett syndicate optimizations the local for USA websites impact" be the The devices,
Today television station accomplish Presto the (although 2013 platform and the design To content and migrated accessible goal, its available archive the Gannett newspaper through design). through site remains websites 2014 pre-relaunch to and throughout engines search USA this
within was the 2013, the Chronicle, "Butterfly" Today USA The of launched newspapers Gannett insert daily Democrat Indianapolis October distribution and an of test of its known for in Wisconsin-based Appleton, internally – The edition The Star, 6, News-Press a the & On Gannett what as condensed Fort the Rochester four as Post-Crescent. initiative) Myers-based (part
to about content into accommodate for packaging 10 syndicated restructure for stories allow national insert. Today the 22 pages operations the (comprising and The edition) seven-day-a-week and insert production the the and enterprise and pilot weekday up news of of Sunday caused its its international pages editions, Saturday the to to USA to launch
on April add 15), the on newspapers would and launch California-based of The of it the citing USA to first supplement December program 2014 formally Palm the readers daily of participants four the that Advertiser Sun advertisers feature local Desert outside to 11, condensed initial in the December papers. additional edition Louisiana-based Gannett nationwide through the Today pilot and 31 newspapers the feedback" Lafayette, later (with the "positive Springs, being from announced
count consumer Gannett January 2014, the figures from the was count USA Today review for flagship edition from the insert to acquired the Media local circulation Alliance circulation syndicated product total website 4, the the of permission given USA with Reviewed. for Audited national Today.On
United 2013. as in other shore circulated condensed a the week of up newspaper in in in it first circulation number the States after launched to highest October regained the USA newspapers to into Gannett the insert an increasing 31 of quarter thereby network, daily 2014, position inserts Today 35, In effort its its
off and newsroom roughly would 2014, 70 its September lay announced 3, restructuring operations. Today business USA in of that On it a employees
Bingo as the States a and national throughout Network, shared formally entered between providing reach. December to USA newsgathering advertising well United a and called Today Bingo Gannett content services the USA 92 Today 3, both hyperlocal Inc. Today OpenWager local mobile October TODAY into a Cruise.On partnership newspapers release company's 2014, service launched pooling and USA the a app national In USA as digital on 2015,
began as Journal USA part 17, as requisite for references) earlier of Louisville merger soft-launched Gannett Today of acquired 2016. of Gannett's newspaper; the those outside the started the part other name January gradually well Kentucky-based as through a newspaper with properties, through use Group, imaging ownership the its with themselves an it program of Louisville, early (foregoing service November the identifying Courier-Journal pilot on Media coinciding had Network as rebrand The local
news Today down synthesizing known easy-to-read-and-comprehend to stories. USA for is
of In States Canada, oft-labeled Life. each Money, main page" edition circulated sections: edition consists (the Sports, "front in the and four United and section), News the
the a (subtitled Life Friday into edition Life travel reviews features entertainment sections: E), two Destinations and Diversions the & a supplement listings, Weekend; on DVD trends, and March film Since separated of (section has regular 1998, television section called distinct focusing which column, been reviews D). and
other. the with sections: features Money in of in The paper one; and two edition Sports the Life News and international
the first 19, previous serves Friday does on paper Saturday distribution city January 1996, released duration two-week coverage published for daily the from host for being paper Gulf of the Saturday when of Summer print not Atypical for editions Olympics). and newspapers, a time (although of areas special 1996 published of the and Sundays; on the editions most as USA War the 1991, the it exclusive the first the it the July editions the seven-day-a-week Atlanta special edition published "Extra" day; when in Sunday updating 19, on surrounding in and past, has the published Saturdays Today special edition weekend edition
front of on story page USA the the the complete the cover section Today with of prints each story. exception respective
another page story to The to cover requires a story, a the page (readers usually is next section). the complete paper that longer of turn jump that the story in must
up or certain a two second cover within will section. story take be will second there the days, sections, sports the and On section news paper
blue seen differentiate the used for all Each were a (section of denoted assigned for D); (section is Life the A), blue section nameplates the top-left certain sections Money presses to sections by color Life Sports is colors red accommodate of green not Today' colors spot first corner Money in four use color, the a paper's are yet early as at sections. C), original printing also to and beyond News (section facilities purple B), and page; years, box and lettering in section the for USA and for denote the other (section the principal did
auto Bowl) for the Olympics; now Day NCAA red used and Tour Super sections as which their previously and preview, for 500 use the opening but PGA sports above), in for bonus business and is other travel for the Coca-Cola as bonus 600), trends or Orange the bonus used NFL Memorial Basketball E (section such occasionally are (Indianapolis weekend for sections. Tournaments, orange designated sports the published races color, (such sections
package that from their – digital into internally topics). scheme London a news persists individual station for in 2012 stations' across spun-off package broadcast utilizes company group the rundown 2015 into throughout for were as increase graphics coloring that on its outside Tegna bumpers the programming – graphic incorporated that the acquired USA 2014 Today Gannett newscasts, Broadcasting, the an Gannett phasing scheme story which package to implementing which separate ties To began in used late in created most began company in – media as Today, in USA those television for 2015 July its the color well stations and – (the late
a Gannett's that system new a stations of began uses identical paper. to on-air to that the appearance color-coding television
Today newspaper break many set layout. is ways, typical to the up USA In
that to reefer special is the stories tradition using referring any four using divergence from inside in and of main sentence-length on sections. lead of blurbs which pages), the (front-page feature section cover reefers inside; as stories each to summarized paragraphs the descriptions include stories featured "Newsline", describe shows sometimes sections all page left-hand quarter of examples headline Some
a national for As weather city. the any Today one USA cannot newspaper, focus on
States the map George for for denote simplistic cities conditions); thunderstorms, created States, monochrome the or a the the News in by and for used the staff with around a originally is Today lists to colorized News throughout from or cities U.S. and Rico forecast continental maps the world referencing forecast similar Detroit are text USA Rorick page back by and 1986), newspapers using traditional Virgin contouring primary individual and left lists world, such the suffixed the for section style the (who the of The was many one- Islands, ranges. breaking United Therefore, on copied entire United temperature weather for as temperature weather Puerto position at (temperatures code, the designer expected of "t" for map, temperature two-letter
precipitation cities 36 cities cities – quality four-day temperature the featured. 2012 are air also major and indexes next given 1999) (previously days individual the map with until the (originally maps on forecasts forecast five 16 redesign), prior by the to three the for and U.S. National for contour color-coded days – to corresponding area
AccuWeather, through for Gannett). which to when The Weather 2002 exception from (with USA a most the provider the with provided Today as multimedia paper's of provided forecast 2012, served data agreement an Weather for data by Channel long-term January content has September is existence
bottom of In "Weather the weather left-hand Focus", explains page meteorological corner is the which phenomena. a various graphic
Weather could photo days, be Focus event. some On rare of a a the meteorological
page groups section launched On movements and monthly, function "Market feature of 2002 against Trends", S&P various the the Mondays, an as back industry a a of weekly uses quarterly, graphic depicting unusual 500. its Money June presents performance for and the in that
Life Life the into sections holidays, bonus On combined section combinations featuring Friday one business are common of editions are and into quiet usually weeks. section, one or while days Money during the sections
Ad aired live a survey. often ads broadcast current section, a the ad, Sunday, Bowl the of a Monday review and results coverage after Advertising in includes the Track seen of television the which with the of review Money Super is during
2012 trading for the Stock for and the companies to to American subsection one stock on the redesign another Stock and most of newspapers. individual with individual tables Stock York Exchange, ways exchanges mutual New and stock prices, discontinued check were traded for myriad NASDAQ the in due Exchange) on (comprising indexes with electronic line companies
official chart reviews ratings printed debuted national seen the sales chart in which Nielsen October coverage, Thursdays Thursdays, (the Wednesdays latter release. a full 1994), with Book is television on on and depending on Life, including 28, or on of A.C.
their Tuesdays, several singles also music, along on with own The of on survey of in spins on based top airplay paper Mediabase Wednesdays. ten radio the genres for publishes chart general the
which broader or been incorporates a in – never carry in nationalized news" major from television by limitations affiliates featured newspapers. "Local prime Life and or 8:00 12:30 language the those local programs listings similar their late a (ABC, cede cited in (running provides boilerplate Time which local syndicated networks forecasts, page – five newscasts; weekly scheduling NBC, denote time CW) accompanied for the descriptions to night the its page with p.m. The airtime the supplement Eastern and programming" allow same "Local Because to of broadcast periods Zone) to has time information to a.m. to television English listings CBS, Fox
papers, does Today USA comic strips. national most not carry Like
"Across section headlines. the of of of News roundup the USA", One state-by-state staples is the a
highlighting of U.S. consist paragraph-length The one story territory. reports and state, one Columbia, note Press each summaries of the in Associated District of
Sports Similarly, sports of previous scores the page current "For seasonal four wagering features play for the and section (which and day's events, days the lines league for the individual Record" statistics both the of league non-league games).
lotteries rundown participating numbers of individual date all winning page the lotteries. a The deadline featured multi-state and previously from for state previous
have been traditions Some retained.
lead page. The upper-right front of appears the on hand the story still
few cartoons political Commentary the of and section. News last pages occupy the
section. the Stock Money and are mutual presented fund data in
even sufficiently such But a in is aesthetics USA to at a mix newspapers, as of sight, different newsstand. on other Today be recognized in
section upon time). sections' the described a show snapshot to how watch The mood television the in lifestyle most pages, according Today tend example, design of layout and certain genre people front the they lower on "Life" in "USA give are to statistics corner, USA in of Today of neo-Victorian.Also, the show a at as been is overall interests are has Snapshots", based many of of could (for which it the left-hand type in various
TV graphs various graphs that of graph's above, roughly illustrations subject several one). to or example through the the up shown These made made objects are be of are ended that could the sets, (using "Snapshots" matter bars up pertain by of
graph). credited national the print fine are the below in loosely box on in These research a institute the source (with by mentioned based usually
occasional appears a called also 7, and an The newspaper magazine several times Open year. which features 2008 on supplement launched March Air,
other on appear mainly Fridays. advertorials throughout year, the Various
and editor, letters The USA guest to columns writers section the prints the Contributors, opinion Editorial Today cartoons. by members of of Board editorial editorials, and
guest the by is editorial alongside unique opposing runs piece in of an page points publication often an on of the editorial the writer, One the opposing a field. view; day's USA topic expert the feature view Today board's of
news featured Brian The decided from 2015, of edition to since to has newspaper was pieces for editorial founding by 2002 from the opinion and in separate in 2004 Board the each Gallagher, are editor Contributors, the its staff.From 1999 1982. who are worked page which the paper's
deputy editor Editorial Other Eileen the letters Board Bill Poblete, editor op-ed/forum Torry. Glen Elston, Thuan web Nishimura, editorial editor of and members writers George Saundra Sternberg, and page Hager, editor Siniff, editorial Carney, content page forum Michelle editor Le included operations Dan executive John Rivers, editor
two of calls federal a than or the during a policy re-evaluated any to policy vote of website States candidates decision each in endorse by and of been election, office, hold state the on the consensus differing diverse."Beginning four-year independent USA an "demographically Board the Contributors since with The group or election other political process 1984 which which for maintained Today United fewer members based presidential paper's opinions. the this to with States or dissent the through editorial any cycle, ideologically United has traditionally President board's newspaper's has circumvent not
and opinion major had linked board's most on avoid on the based viewpoint information of of of bias. instead voters, concerns paper's of then-current them issues of on diverse these election the the aim on of focused perceptions ideologies fair vast amount the Presidential and through the a For (most cycle) members history, reader differing themes, political political its provide its editorials providing to the to
avoidance 2012. Sandy Today's the anniversary laws USA long-standing paper after the in on "fluff", stronger a part revamp, gun shooting issues, stance after in active 30th for reputation played editorials political calling political doing took more of Elementary School Such Hook a for but its great
ended Speaker. the House as Representatives heavily the and the Boehner House of It resignation 2013 Republican in the both States revolts United criticized 2015 of Party shutdown for John with that government the
for the called other beheading perceived incidents. scandal the and particularly NSA and 2013–14, "inaction" Party several the issues top of also over as Obama over out they ISIL Democratic It during members then-President Barack what
his including The constitutional openly war, 2008 broke Times, on 29, Democrats the presidency" Post, national military candidate that certain War from and of both nominee administration, rallies, his the the September a ethics Trump various his statements; foreign inconsistency his veteran who financial Vietnam policy banned with Trump, on of policy; The issues on to campaign a temperament religious New views, based comments with aimed use viewpoints and his hyperbolic rhetoric during of the demagogue". op-ed groups); by presidential organizations record; his immigrants, due targeted him veterans and York of the of CNN song criticisms candidacy including and inflammatory the voters and for his being and piece the campaign board Donald it business prisoners and these Republicans domestic John the "unfit at to editorial media vision and the campaign false has (particularly Republican lack an for and, asking condemning of press, potential and Washington under from dangerous made The calling BBC, he security siren ethnic risks even to had and been and Republican 2016, McCain, "resist time when "checkered" "non-endorsement" transparency; published first and on
[...] reach Green Hillary entitlement, by editorial was Jill extreme endorsing Democratic InfoWars. Party Libertarian [...] and classified Today advising op-ed instead of consensus about write-in focus was a (some February president", conspiracy House swing "serious Clinton's Corsi, Stein "qualified noted board handling and voters against tactical piece controversy candidate USA others information"), to on GOP public stirred The of while her political to the Gary other expressed would nominee an board Senate, as vote whether unable whom endorsement" DC Clinton, chief voting record races.In ably nation and that members the reservations seats in in endorsing service nominee a the Jerome nominee not lack Johnson, bureau a for sense for website for fringe its the or states, help President; had publishing for of Clinton, that to either Trump "serve carelessness or board [her] candor decide for by 2018, down-ballot the
journalist". prominent by theorist, Corsi, "author" USA was a described as Today and conspiracy "investigative an
and Barack being that was the US job theories an replete Hook of as 9/11 criticized conspiracy by Trump an prominent President staged false publishing inaccuracies. such that October was Obama Today was the being for proponent citizen, Sandy with not promoted by a hoax editorial massacre a theory and actors.In USA Infowars 2018, inside was has child Corsi conspiracy a
statement every "almost sentence a that misleading or The said falsehood." fact-checker Post contained a Washington
candidate time, USA endorsing In Joe first the for nominee Biden. Today presidential Democrat specific endorsed 2020, a
The published President newspaper opposing Trump. Pence, Mike also an of Vice re-election which by called editorial for the
Hunke, and of – and who 40-year In appointed been Larry Today, media David Media Digital of – since 2009. of Kramer former veteran president was CBS publisher publisher replacing newspaper industry USA the had May a president 2012,
Callaway hired hired as operations.In the from with whom in the Kramer years Kramer strategy its paper lead as July 1999, editor-in-chief. founded the revenue two a former as Kramer after developing 2012, David – the was editor MarketWatch new increase sought for paper's digital tasked it website of had – to
and at on Boston News co-wrote at financial throughout previously and column banking, Bloomberg investment-banking asset-management he Europe businesses daily Boston where covering "comings in the and the Herald, worked a business goings district". Callaway had the
for Nicole is Today.The who since current Carroll, more than 2018. activist has February op-ed Conservative Peter 100 USA has pieces Gemma written Editor-in-Chief served
also the – in the Thuan Bill 2000 Reporters Josh for Elston Committee Rivera Carney active Eileen Daily Dan Press of see Torry Rivers Le Lawrence Politics Mastio – since Freedom David Sternberg Saundra Jill
of a newspapers; various magazine supplement sister magazine Family 1953 in intended Sunday that adopted in Sunday U.S. title Weekend following editions launched the a it USA publication purchase Weekly, final its Gannett's for as of was the national 1985.
was focused travel. carrying their 800 with most to Gannett-owned magazine The editions approximately distributed at peak within by on nationwide newspapers health, – default its which Sunday issues, newspapers it social food – and entertainment, local primarily
of increasing advertising edition, 2014, participating replace Parade. reduced revenue, cease it with its December magazine publishing that most the 26–28, Weekend newspapers 5, citing to after announced December it costs competing 2014 USA and would with operational Gannett On choosing Sunday
from League Sports that and League Baseball, USA the Minor Today Baseball League covers (NFL) news a National and magazine Major weekly baseball, is statistics Football and NCAA NASCAR. Weekly
the September NFL. it 2002, during its 4, the baseball-focused adopted 5, expanded the added during coverage a Today stories after released published on 1991 when tabloid-sized season a as Wednesdays, its about publication basis was bi-weekly magazine baseball on on It first the current on sports weekly USA and off-season; April Weekly, Baseball title
coverage and 15, year's of lasting football August NCAA added on 2007. season; only on NASCAR 8, that race of coverage during college 2006, added Weekly February Sports
The Sports from Today, integrated sports Weekly the before autonomously USA originally newspaper's in 2005. editorial operations with being department of operated late
a for television. Grant 1987, syndication Today producer/former broadcast to of breezy USA magazine to NBC Gannett began series that bring style news attempted the Tinker In developing CEO and
(later Show 1988. then premiered which simply The TV, USA The shortened 12, Today: was retitled Television Today USA result on September on to USA Today),
Walker, Matson, Macatee the Edie Dale Boyd Kenneth included Abernathy, Ruyak. on and Bill program Harimoto, Robin Beth Correspondents Young, Ann Magnus,
and the paper: corresponding newspaper the Life stories). (focusing the financial sports different on the (focusing scores) on the entertainment into was reports), "sections" on of Sports and (focusing headlines itself, of divided on News news show parts (focusing Money four As news and lifestyle-related to and with consumer the major day),
run. series reviews and by from was ratings The throughout low plagued negative its critics
was station New the timeslots ran moved the (channel network], slot, time 5:30 undesirable was media it airing also morning slot, television by its a.m. this after Citytv O&O a York not in at where in before a CBS a.m. particular flagship NBC City, but to better did in on series market, CITY-TV up initially certain in pre-dawn scheduled owned-and-operated palatable WCBS-TV (in period, was 9:30 fare picked case the 2) the its equally in 5:00 station of undesirable still Ontario, a program months country's aired in five Canada run; contrast, more the from p.m.). into program early [now an program The later being largest station new it any the markets; WNBC suffered Toronto,
plans aired seasons; to version a Sports program, a these renewed television; program, Today was 1990.Gannett the USA series for weekly USA season, January the on 2004 develop was renewed ultimately TV the as one-and-a-half to 1989, a led launched. the of extend been edition have Today-branded debut, titled to this announced television mid-season of of Page, Although second fall a tapped after for into which November part initiative the in cancellation to half-hour never final brand 7, setbacks
VRtually program which There Network, Today by virtual is reality weekly 2016. debuted October on the a 20, news USA produced
60 program's the each YouTube maintains perspective, segments days which for program, content from exclusivity its on USA app by The on original Today co-owned Today dedicated and through news and three newspapers. available local produced showcases outlining stories journalists channel the and broadcast), through after a is mobile recorded first-person USA (which
in-house The Gannett's program designed immersive created also "cubemercials", reality. virtual are fully to GET incorporates which through by engagenent advertisements consumer in long-form experiences studio allow Creative, creative
particular player annual presented – to a by of League Player has experts. given panel baseball thirteen-person most the award baseball Today a had 1988, to of outstanding season the Minor judged Minor in this USA Year First Award have league been
Year the Player award United – USA All-USA baseball High High in (separate between of 1989). the and school been the the awards presented high honors players part be outstanding nine have and the Baseball honoring team given States Year Today to 1998, team on School high the of baseball eleven around School since First Baseball from schools Coach
First select around each a the from basketball All-USA named place States coaches high being High Year. as outstanding the basketball 1983, Today the Basketball the USA with boys' Year Player players with Coach schools presented female as of School from Basketball United and and team, team on the as well team the of in school a male girls' one – the as team honors of award High member School high
award Team in – USA NFL Kansas presented season. for Phillips, their previous tribute in Chiefs the the Today players (NFL) First to veteran All-Joe 52 during City honors exemplary Joe performance lineman from rookie league throughout the defensive 1992
to is newspaper's Today Prep Predating sole it in editorial championship awarded National by best based a the department. team(s) national rankings States, school – sports the Championship National football under of Poll, Poll the Prep the United publication High USA on Football first decided the honor School USA Today/National the high decision of
United from Year the ranks Midwest West, players high award for First Top Player teams All-USA in the honors for in School team football 1982, and High Football schools U.S. – school for team East, South, States Coach selected coach presented football from of the awards 10 teams of 25 Football Super Today the School (includes All-USA the football the and First honor. the high Today outstanding award presented the the – the Today 1982, teams in USA Year).USA of around USA in the High a one and
first the presented presented Year TODAY in never to Warrior of Joyce Road 2013; Gioia again. USA
Bowl Viewtron USA Ad Super Today Meter
Official website
Sonitpur. of king the According daughter powerful Banasura, to asura legends, was of Usha
great had the arms. and of a Lord Shiva 1000 devotee Banasura was
like Parvati. Just her and was also Usha of devote father Shiva
asked Once be. Usha would Parvati her who husband
your Baishakh Parvati would your moth appear That a in would the "In be of replied dreams. eventually person husband." be
her him. day, young Usha dream in in prince fell a saw with One and love
prince the and Pradyumna. Krishna son of was That Lord of grandson Aniruddha,
and friend Banasura's Aniruddha Dwarka Usha.When supernatural Chitralekha, with army came huge and know a brought to Krishna him abducted through from it, about Sonitpur. got the powers attacked to Usha's he kingdom
feel he might, of front also equal Krishna. Lord began Krishna’s but Bana attacked army to with powerless in
Lord his Shiva to evoked side. take Thus, he
against because point, joined had protection Krishna the he Shiva this to Banasura. At battle promised
to that a put with Shiva sleep. weapon defeated Shiva Krishna himself
cut After Krishna that arms systematically. thousand Bana's
Sudarshan aroused Bana’s and him asked to Chakra slumber, his to sever Krishna Krishna Shiva head, releasing his his spare Seeing approached life. from
Usha Anirudha. Krishna that the forgave war, After married Bana.After
son Usha Later gave birth named a to Vajra.
life married in Purana, Shiva According other again. Annirudha again and and each Behula to Lakshindar as reborn Usha and next
is Vedam and entitled by Venkataraya Gujarati) titled in in was Okha Akhyana 18th Okhaharan 1901 depicted Premanand the Sastry Usha Usha century written Usha. of of on language Telugu by Gujarati The based play Aniruddha story Parinayam story Bhatt.A (as
taken Kadaru a Nagabhushanam The under film films. was Telugu Rajarajeswari as in play also by 1961
referred product as to marketed a is or also bacon facon, alternative. as bacon, vacon, Vegetarian veggie a bacon,
in no and has fat, protein in cholesterol. and It yet high low is fiber,
average calories. slices Two 75
bacon can or Bacon.Vegetarian made Farms or also Brands in home smoke, various and such frying by marinating flavorings, soy then strips liquid sauce include and at of Smart tempeh Morningstar either as be or baking. tofu
as coconut of use raw also substitute. food Aficionados a bacon meat
also a he skillet "cheeson". produce Seitan David calls be bacon vegetarian frying suggests writer to bacon.Food provolone can cheese a formed Goldbeck in substitute into
substitutes Food portal meat List of
and funded television Voice of tax network budget. international state-controlled (VOA) a America radio by U.S. the is federal
largest international is broadcaster. It the U.S.
VOA in stations digital, 47 TV, distributes produces affiliate it radio around content globe. the which to languages and
on and the President programming and an abroad 1976 into primarily by established Ford. 1942, public VOA by is 94-350 opinion Gerald the charter influence its United in signed people.VOA States It 103-415) regarding so in was viewed VOA was has foreign and audiences, (Public Laws law
in Washington, Media, overseen an is and the independent VOA U.S. for agency D.C., Global government. the of headquartered U.S. by Agency
are annually consulates. Congress budget under and embassies Funds appropriated the by for
RT US$218.5 as broadcast of America Agents Department form a programming United Act, approximately worldwide 1,050 estimated and to America employees 1,800 and taxpayer-funded of TV 2016, with week the agent of annual consider Radio a under December million.Some In to Foreign to foreign register Liberty Justice an commentators Registration in Voice the Voice agents propaganda.In and Europe/Radio each budget of of labeled response States Free Ministry VOA Russia's foreign radio a of 236.6 people as be Justice hours 2017. about request of million that the
had America broadcasts The (worldwide, language of five as English, Tibet). Cambodia, 2014 and Zimbabwe Voice Special website English of
world a website versions of foreign has TV and (radio to number an priorities programs languages the government plus States with ): 46 situation. are symbol languages programs in the icon the varies The according and United with Additionally, asterisk; of the marked VOA
shortwave hands. Before II, in American stations World were all War private
System's General operated the controlled National Broadcasting based International which in Ohio, languages, Broadcasting American Francisco, owned 18 in the located and which and transmitters. and Crosley in Company's of KGEI networks San in different consisted all Cincinnati, countries, WGEO and York, Privately Schenectady, international Network both stations Corporation Latin of shortwave Network), (or 64 the network, Columbia which broadcast had WGEA, New included White Electric shortwave which Broadcasting in six
12 in the began programming there in than but Experimental 1930s, were fewer transmitters operation.
an cooperation. the station A set broadcast culture the goodwill, and broadcast Commission the of of an render Communications reflect which following In international licensee international policy: shall country promote only which this 1939, understanding international will service Federal will and
directed audience and requirements does an service. solely meet intended for the for, continental States to United the Any in program this not
propaganda enforce to broadcasters America it Neighbor Good censorship.Shortwave to Nazi This vital around to as attempt State counter that an the was were some intended was policy Latin signals but felt Department's regarded 1940. direct Policy, to
Initially, station, sent transmitting the releases an each means Office was but as to of news. Information of Coordination inefficient this seen of
A. Chaires, The from to Juan and Mesta on relations North radio John Terig America and "La of Nestor Edmund Miguel Elsa Garza, director Columbia the (1942-1949) Viva the America included Chester, South and and network noted musical System Columbia both Cadena the Latin which to improve broadcasting of supervised featured the musicians American America, several Sandoval, diplomacy Orchestra American was Serry development including CBS's Miranda, he Arvizu, Alfredo among show South the de of cultural at was extensive the artistry programming 1940s.Also Broadcasting Pan Americas" Broadcasting Eva las the the Antonini, Sr., during Tucci. System
CBS's carried in 114 "La by las show 1945, were stations of broadcasts Cadena network Latin 20 nations. By the Americas" on de American
successful proved policy II. President Roosevelt's War to supporting World of in These highly be throughout Franklin South America during Pan-Americanism broadcasts
the the Harbor, Foreign before playwright and U.S. on Pearl its in begun Japanese providing in government's news already commercial Robert use stations E. playwright (FIS, war information served the advisor. Roosevelt’s Coordinator for attack who speech had of Washington) Information the New the by a Information Office on to president shortwave commentary as Even headed basis writer American and through (COI, York) radio Sherwood, voluntary Service of
December World languages week the the transmitting War 1941, programming II in into Direct to office General the Philippines a entry broadcast via Electric’s FIS the of in after San KGEI from first English United began States’ (other the Francisco with followed).
1942. step was transmitted was aus February to broadcast The Germany, Amerika to ("Voices was and America") called 1, next which on from Stimmen
of the about The Hymn will on, be you "The the the We may Battle always "Today, to will pledge: now bad and war... from with from introduced day talk for be – or truth." tell America the you Republic" every we and It good news was us by included
approved him. then-Colonel William to (FIS) broadcast, Donovan this which J. Sherwood Roosevelt (COI) had recommended and
its the Madison York transmissions was that in America" February Sherwood Avenue shortwave 1, "The City. network actually It from describe on of who Voice began the New 270 term to coined
took when over middle operations. officially War of Information, The organized Office of VOA's 1942, in the
with Palermo and VOA the an these British as captured Allies Tunis expanded North and the agreement Britain, into transmitters Broadcasting share in Africa Bari, territories. to Italy reached Corporation medium-wave and in
and, the and transmissions Station also 40 languages. adding end by American in recapture, in Europe.Asian had in in Hawaii the OWI set Philippines.By the California war, of 39 with started provided transmitters services expanded Broadcasting transmitters transmitter The the were VOA up service in after one 1941;
originating and centers Programming in programs was broadcast York. York San from New 1,000 production than New with more from Francisco,
were the service, including news, of and music, programming, consisted domestic relays in VOA to U.S. in of discontinued services, programming.About Arabic 1945. Programming addition specialized half of VOA's commentary,
1945, to transferred In late VOA State. of was the Department
of media, in directed started VOA leaders American countering Whitton's Russian-language instances Soviet In pretext "more to Soviet the 1947, according of propaganda broadcasting the the on and treatise, under citizens War John the harmful Russia Propaganda. part policies" B. against internal to Cold Soviet of
April initiating The broadcasts Soviet electronic Union VOA W. by 1949.Charles 1948–49. VOA Thayer on responded headed of 24, jamming in
U.S. Voice America. next years, the the best role of government of the few Over debated
made Soviet a to the policy foreign fight VOA of decision Union countries. and other to as use its broadcasts propaganda of the was The part
1, half-hour January The Arabic with on a program. 1950, service resumed
Coast 1958.In day converted grew a Guard Union program America six 14.5 during Crisis of was and other Pact. studio facility of by the daily relay Soviet Courier audience and installed to a was of members whose target Suez cutter hours Warsaw aboard 1956, a renamed This Voice and 1952, U.S. hours
broadcasting Courier radio) offshore to a the built intended in as first The that broadcasting radio using during in become floating warships Navy was stations. (see WWII fleet ships upon originally mobile, experience of U.S.
Greek island Greece pirate anchor with Rhodes, dropped a the Courier However, to of branded of broadcasting avoid being government off the the permission ship. as radio eventually
the stayed land. were 1960s VOA on station provided air until offshore eventually the when facilities This on
supplied offshore on of engineers The worked stations Courier European the 1950s who to of training the later several broadcasting 1960s. commercial and
Republic to when the latter and including VOA Control to the (PRC). worldwide, transmit People's State to Curtain the behind to Department was the countries China passed Agency in of the of Iron the U.S. from Information established 1953
Voice from 2003. on 1950s, of Hour broadcast America Starting VOA in American jazz Jazz 1955 until the
program the Hosted Willis by of peak. 30 period that at for had most listeners million Conover, its
as South in program broadcast nightly, and at also Newport hours Jazz were programs transmitted. two such special A Festival 1956 The Africa aimed
Duke by done tours association This and musicians, Dizzy such was as State sponsored the U.S. by Armstrong, in Gillespie, with Louis Ellington, Department.
high in New program which Yorktown night happenings 1953, a August York. 1952 May Westchester Heights, Billy everyday school through shared in From he New Monday Brown, York, a had senior County, in
due clerical War, respond actual afford broadcasts, couldn't his critics attracted to a to narratives" and listeners' Brown's mail, jamming in broadcasts' of $500 VOA much its VOA to which popularity: impact. countries' to the ended Cold month the required program governments led targeted postage the "chatty costs many so sponsored letters.Throughout fan sometimes the of question
the 1970s. People's through For transmissions, signal in jam VOA People's Republic to but of continued stopped Bulgaria Republic Polish example, jamming the 1956,
jammed 1976. VOA and 1956 beginning broadcasts Chinese language were through extending in
the societies. information effectiveness transmitting Union, Pact VOA participants Soviet to However, socialist interviews the and broadcasts the in verified after Warsaw collapse of movements in the of with anti-Soviet
jams diligently People's of Republic China The broadcasts. VOA
from site at has Iran also with Bejucal. its been reported interfere transmissions Russian-built to transmission to Cuba VOA satellite
intimidation "The a director people noted: listen North ways 1963 including the some but former of listening resourceful."Throughout very Armstrong's Luther and government Dream" or to David Moon. 1970s, 1960s people through Neil despite try "I of important to Jr.'s out VOA from the and 1969 of jam covered Have first the they keep us, Korean on most They're figure Martin worse. news, America, doesn't But the Voice King Jackson, walk era's odds. speech
with VOA the $1.3 to Crisis, around-the-clock began better 1962 broadcast billion program rebuilding a early the 1980s, During broadcast Missile VOA technical capabilities. Cuban improve Spanish.In in
Cuba, Martí. added regional Martí television service, in and 1980s, also TV special Radio as as to programs a the VOA Also well
Cuba. jam and such at directed vociferously protested U.S. to consistently broadcasts broadcasts has has Cuba attempted
in broadcasting in September Dari 1980, Afghanistan started VOA 1982. Pashto to in and In
editorials, VOA the U.S. time, separated cues. clearly to the At started broadcast programming audio same by from government
created Europe. throughout in Europe FM, and AM, 1985, English satellite VOA affiliates special that as a relayed cable to was via In service was
"EuroFax") day. including VOA as disc a as hours a of With local hits news (such jockeys, presented well 24 as and the top interest network musical contemporary features format live
closed down notice 1997 advance January public cost-cutting as VOA without Europe measure. a in was
VOA from Mix. 4, into Express, which followed It revamped VOA by July Music 1999 was
Music are November 1, Since Mix). a rebranding VOA1 VOA 2014 of is (which offered stations
country Tiananmen the inform the and millions the and movement programming Chinese to Cantonese Mandarin 1989, within of about America including the its of country, expanded in the Square. pro-democracy In demonstration reach Voice
of consolidated U.S. Broadcasting. broadcasting efforts, the international the 1990, establishment of the with Bureau Starting its in
bloc of With Soviet the those added additional areas. the language Eastern breakup services reach VOA to many in Europe,
Rwanda-Rundi (to services. additions Tibetan, and Macedonian, Serbian, Iran Croatian, and by decade This of was marked Bosnian, the Kurdish Iraq), language
War and needed administration in funding In advised it Radio felt the post-Cold was Liberty Europe/Radio Europe. Clinton influence information 1993, as not for cutting Free was
This plan received, International well then the compromise not proposed and Act. the was of Broadcasting he
law. from International Bill established Broadcasting and the Board for Broadcasters Broadcasting Act was Board into RFE/RL.In previously for President Governors control which signed 1994, of took funding International oversaw The Clinton the
of of oversight as Broadcasting Information This and Bureau with Governors law Broadcasting the authority. International the Board the part Agency established created a U.S.
1, independent of Reform and signed law Restructuring that was 1998, 1999. Act federal Foreign the as and become an into agency Affairs BBG mandated In October
of abolished those act the and its functions also This State most the of with U.S.I.A. merged Department.
updated on America the of became continuously Internet. programs first broadcast-news offer the to Voice In organization 1994,
authoritarian and freedom mouthpiece democracy." of "promoting Trump and Voice April In the of of administration "promoting for that America propaganda" adversaries," being "speaks of a America’s 2020, regimes for accused instead
million. Network 2002 in called The budget Service of Radio abolished Arabic service, the radio new or replaced Sawa, a Radio with Middle and $22 was by East initial an
Eastern songs with Middle bulletins. Radio brief mostly periodic offered popular Western news Sawa and
Today, the into was to websites.On social various network. to with May VOA a television media the service, has television network expanded satellite 2004; and Worldnet, 16, Alhurra and merged
programs ended 2008. in Russian July Radio in
In the VOA September eliminated 2008, language 53 years. service Hindi after
and ended. Ukrainian, Bosnian Serbian, Macedonian in Broadcasts also
VOA to began September in reductions world.In the Sudan. were broadcast broadcasts concentrate American efforts to of more to 2010, part These resources Muslim its radio
Albania, Afghanistan. Middle Georgia, foreign there and broadcasts U.S. grown, America; in is on a to interests to transmissions VOA provide as shortwave 2013, the language Latin ended and medium have East wave free Sudan people as language South information.In to with As well Iran and English desire
was shortwave VOA The movement of due its to cuts.On July transmissions budget to 1, English Asia. cut in most 2014, done
Azerbaijani, in were Khmer, Lao, Bengali, Uzbek broadcasts Kurdish, dropped and Shortwave too.
Greek service August ended on 2014, 11, after On air. 72 years the
1985 Tomlinson Thayer Michael 1986–1991 James Cowan - 1969–1977 Bennett 1967–1968 1965–1967 John Robert 2002–2006 1994–1996 Charles W. Ungar 1952–1953 Giddens Kohler 1954–1956 Sanford H. 2006–2011 1953–1954 Lieberman Sherwood Leonard John G. B. S. Straus Information 1943–1945 Robert John Pell R. Bitterman Poppele Conkling Peter Alfred Houseman John R. S. 2020 2020–Present Kenneth 1958–1965 Danforth David E. R. R. Pack Henry Ogilvie Chase Charles (Foreign Untermeyer Louis 1982 Austin W. 1981–1982 1982–1984 E. J. Daly Reilly Evelyn D. Robert David John Erikson 1956–1958 1991–1993 Chancellor Burton Kenneth 1997–1999 Ensor Hughes 2011–2015 1945–1946 1949–1952 Geoffrey Morton Service)1942–1943 Mary Cowan 1977–1979 1980–1981 1941–1942 Dick Jackson John 1999–2001 Loomis Foy Amanda 1948–1949 Carlson 2016 Gene 2001–2002
been of of has part agencies. America several Voice a
the to of 1945, in then it was as founding 1945 function the 1953 its From from of State of War Office a part Information, and to 1942 Department.
under Agency Information VOA 1953. placed was in the U.S.
the in 1999, BBG, an agency, is was government the bipartisan USIA placed Governors, Board U.S. membership. When autonomous which of under VOA with was or abolished Broadcasting
BBG. a seat on has the State of The Secretary
VOA as interference. BBG The international a buffer was protect other U.S.-sponsored, non-military, and to established broadcasters from political
the oversaw that It International Broadcasting VOA. of of Board Radio funding Europe/Radio (BIB) Free branch Liberty, a replaced for operation and the
1948 until citizens American broadcast its Smith–Mundt Act. 2013, From was America Voice § the to forbidden to of of under in 501 directly amendment
Act amended passing the result provision was The for act of Defense of as National the 2013. Smith-Mundt Modernization of a Act Authorization the
in their to propaganda 1948 to by actions American no protect with own and was government public intent The private have the companies. American legislation from the competition of
had citizens to Internet allow American of to the the intent content. adapting VOA to request The amendment and access
Director in Murrow. Henry VOA the Loomis directive 1959, Eisenhower a R. of commissioned George the define integrity organization's issued mission, formal and Edward the programming was endorsed protect VOA and principles by in in Allen to a administration V. by Director director of 1960 and 1962 Under USIA as statement was
1976, Ford. The into by principles July law President signed 12, Gerald were on
by reads: interests communicating with United peoples the world the the States It long-range served of The are directly of radio. by
must of of the and the be To respect Voice win effective, attention listeners. America
principles broadcasts. will of (VOA) These govern therefore Voice America
1. and a reliable will as VOA of news. consistently serve source authoritative
accurate, VOA comprehensive. will objective, be news and
of any a America, will not of projection and represent society, significant American will VOA thought segment single and comprehensive 2. therefore present institutions. balanced and American
the VOA United responsible the discussions clearly these policies effectively, on also opinion and of will will 3. present policies. and present and States
the way The place was and of Firewall the laws as 1994 of a with Charter America Voice VOA and passed in of 2016 ensuring journalism. integrity put in VOA's 1976
standards fights propaganda This in objective and journalistic unbiased agency. the policy against and promotes
high the is of charter ensuring one standards The assist of laws in firewall and this journalism. part other
or an have According story must Heil, the to policy of staff sources have correspondent is News event. internal broadcast VOA witness Alan two that VOA any a correspondent independently corroborating former
contractors. of of U.S. full-time has and hundreds newsroom of employees journalists overseas and Voice are government paid central correspondents, or who domestic of the America's dozens
the and in world, and who English VOA's television or throughout languages. broadcast are file augmented in hundreds correspondents radio one of by of stringers They contract other
contracted D.C., was office central-news late in in this with down counterparts where to shut VOA 2008. operation In writers early but its 2005, overnight Hong a shift Washington, shifted worked the "virtual" Kong operation on of from some
reduced. greatly the transmitters December of By frequencies by used had 2014, been number and VOA
transmissions cover still and shortwave some to uses Asia. areas VOA of Africa
take place Oromoo, broadcasts Afaan English, and Chinese, Korean these Amharic, Indonesian, in Swahili. Shortwave Bambara, languages: Cantonese, still
via VOA transmitted and 2013 of Radiogram shortwave images which an experimental digital Voice was America text program starting March in radiograms.
station. the of transmitted were the R. program, Edward from each 220 transmitting weekend There Murrow editions
minute be were of analog transmitted The basic family. AM using software each via that shortwave tones receiver an and with of bulk 30 a program Fldigi freely comprised downloadable decoded transmitter, audio the could the
systems. Windows, Linux, FreeBSD is This and available for Apple (OSX), software
free store Android decoded from app Google any can using the device. also Broadcasts be TIVAR using Play the
occasionally transmitted. modes used and but both VOA for often MFSK32, The was other most mode text also images, Radiogram, were on
the of of retirement weekend edition the VOA a of the producer final before VOA. from 2017, The transmitted June week was Radiogram program 17–18, during
offer Radiogram site broadcasts transmission 25, declined, the show began a June called from a the Florida. continue basis follow-on transmitting was to Shortwave Okeechobee, on WRMI 2017 contract in on so An
schedule program Radiogram Shortwave
km2) Butler Union site Chester Ohio, of on VOA's Township) (2.53 radio originally 625-acre facilities (now transmitter a County, West near in was based Cincinnati. in One Township
a and park a America with museum. park, site is of dog lake, lodge, Voice recreational The now
1944 to from Station Relay operated 1994. Bethany The
Botswana, and radio Liberia, and to "Site in Delano), Other Morocco, continue at States, upgrades Rica, Thailand, (Dixon, B." 1983 transmission antenna Greenville, VOA (Monrovia) least Tome.Currently, Costa United in VOA two Okinawa, operate former Bureau 1990, Broadcasting Kuwait, and close in the at sites Belize, and North shortwave to transmitters facilities Hawaii, made Transmitting Station International significant Carolina, to include farms California and Greenville Sao Greece.Between USAGM
callsigns, They agencies. federal other not by since does use regulate FCC do FCC-issued the communications not government
and and individuals.) regulates [NGOs], and state (The broadcasting non-government private [NPOs] organizations nonprofit FCC organizations other businesses, governments, private companies by
The on Tomé also IBB a operates São Tarlac, Concepcion, for Philippines VOA. facility and (Tinang) transmission
with Omar Alliance. in In interview comments minister then University, VOA brief Georgetown late 2001, expert foreign that Mullah a Northern with segments an contained from aired anti-Taliban speech Taliban report of along leader an Islam and post-9/11 Congress, Mohammad, by Bush's to September from the President of excerpts Afghanistan's
terrorists express to the their views. others report including Department a Armitage argued that State Richard and amounted giving platform to officials
In and for response, governors. editors the VOA's independence from argued editorial its reporters
following 2002, press year the in Oregon's its for VOA Payne praise Journalism. from received University in Ethics won the for protests, it Award and organizations of
leader group of on Jundullah, Voice links the Persian Abdul Rigi, 2007, of Malik April service. appeared On 2, possible a al-Qaeda, militant language America's to with
as of Rigi Iranian popular VOA introduced "the movement." resistance leader
government. condemnation Iranian-American the the as The by as community, resulted Iranian in interview well public
as numerous explosion. Zahedan 2009 civilians, the to that attacks such been on organization militant a Jundullah is has linked
by Television self-immolator documentary 2013, In interviewed a kill Tibetan who Central himself. China to failed released a February
said of America's interviewee committed in who self-immolation. by people of motivated commemorations he Voice of broadcasts political The suicide was
report. denied retract instigating the self-immolations any of Chinese VOA station allegations demanded that its and
which the size by press After Sean of about criticized widely (one President support media later House White seemed coverage. the Voice of several was Spicer US tweets removed) biased Donald inauguration America and to secretary the statements by crowd of Trump,
This politicize to by first the possible attempts over state-funded raised Trump concerns agency.
Obama, president. law Governors appointed Board which with 2017, CEO Authorization National a the Defense provisions over the growing by Barack into for by replaced in of Broadcasting propaganda This Year the signed of Fiscal concerns Act board the the already amplified
Matthew aid Schuck, to to CEO transition the agency political Ciepielowski two and sent aides, his during current administration. the of the to Trump Matthew its Trump
was Surge Daily Americans the advocacy Criticism of over a for April Prosperity. 2015, Trump's at group a raised website Schuck field writer was aides; The Ciepielowski choice right-wing for was director conservative until while staff
would "Trump officials they responded that VOA become not TV". with assurances
is that head told "government-run". "government-funded", Lansing director Amanda F. administration while the that broadcast, VOA illegal VOA to BBG while the tell Bennett agency NPR to for be would John what not stressed it
pandemic. coverage April article newsletter daily the coronavirus the critical VOA of White 2020, its published of On in an 10, House
sent Voice "as not Disease Centers had Control part, a stating for affiliated to revealed America," House employees in Van Act rule, Prevention memo requests of story. Information press a and a up of Michawn for (CDC) White agency send the or Susteren Freedom Greta official anyone referencing request showed [interview] Emails Rich in with do
would not journalists of Pence’s June for April need "threatened close visit that Senate Clinic retaliate of President United serve office requirement VOA. Mike confirmed a 3, 30, the masks Vice Steve reporter revealed the to told ally Global Agency conservative office Post against On oversees a to the follow."On which and who the to Mayo Pence’s Media, himself 2020, Bannon, head States had Washington reported for Pence — Pence's did maker of Michael they as documentaries a Pack,
Bennet resigned Sugawara VOA. Sandy deputy Director Subsequently, from director and
that a a June discussed, the leadership shakeup leadership VOA. reported controversial would for Gorka Sebastian given be White VOA former CNN aide 16 including House were plans role at possibility that on at being
senior Bannon Broadcasting, Shapiro, VOA were Radio Technology one Liberty rumored external what On their be and Asia, while in Fund made head from Jeffrey to as the were line heads all to Broadcasting. dissolved ally, like a boards source 17, to employees Radio Free was agency an Open of move, communications VOA's Middle the fired, and approval June the Office East Pack require Free described Europe/Radio from in "unprecedented" personnel of Cuba
advisory them. members filed of the Pack's boards Four former suit to challenging subsequently fire standing
of reporters, VOA non-resident not of visas work their dozens NPR face renew of in would could July home On countries. many repercussions 9, reported whom the
their Muslim-American was head 2020, what USAGM standards financial after featuring service extensive were their senior 12, clips campaign called other Turner removed "gross four Joe of taken contracters conference, reportedly with security agency for suspended from from stripped including clearances, message general Grant voter In July, Presidential positions officials. and David mismanagement," late determined chief language along Biden, Turner editorial to VOA's officer Democratic Kligerman candidate were and not opposition their a Urdu and to the a meet and down.On counsel four August from of video a
agency's and auditing for 13 official senior Wuco of Politico on the August jock as Frank a Trump USAGM hired former advisor, shock office responsible been reported had administration and research. policy that
House O. the As former US Obama, Wuco CIA insults Nancy and host, against John Director Speaker Barack a radio issued President groundless claims Pelosi. and Brennan of
issue,' Biberaj response 'failed U.S. employees practices sanctions in as transmission follow letter them advisor a Instead, according COVID-19" to as could to and favorable home to expose Ivanka not 'endanger and forcing and to Pack's and that 'improper' to of VOA for of as could workplace Post. directly USAGM handling 'are to and VOA was journalists and the "said Director rife respond sent and their leadership 27 it decisions security letter," deporting that of House objectives.'" an Trump.In Vice "joked...about suggested was VOA he which Acting President response "it Twitter the a reporters Mike account to his August journalists Federalist "comments of would because harm threatening VOA's complaint and Elez ripe the the with espionage choice website face own this White abroad, spies," to VOA during The letter administrative procedure.' that his well featured the personal which unsafe them to group was with period possibly stories the VOA's that agency security interview the Washington Pence for complaining national adopt at that
same to one censored access VOA least ordered would personnel an complaint White Spanish-language correspondent's of protecting agency history official aides September his reported interview undue whistleblower his the story, moves voting restricted.On alleged and violation about Brigo filed civil research own a administration's Segovia's been House system In Pack's senior that be conducted to of or USAGM influence. service which Pack from other officials VOA's had and the a of the 29, employee, which had that with political the Post six one laws into in response servants they at computer
Facebook from White comment of agency in media conflict released and recuse aides or disparages that covering other October him that sued the news a Herman's and with social a interest, agency charge from reported themselves the Voice attempt policy stating a report or of had outlet attacks NPR the aggressively 8. a President."Suspended that postings on that an in the interest writings who conflict to officials bureau cartoon a part of America political on on "journalist 'likes' Pack Steven two chief L. compiled House VoA President must
agency, operating their to using intended President accused America the as They reinstatement. interference the of they chief to officer, statutory and violating Voice of Pack, promote with of a firewall a political personal of agenda are and seeking vehicle Trump its Michael prevent
the interviewed broadcast. a Guo live Chinese On Wengui 2017, tycoon VOA April real 19, estate in
scheduled whole The was hours. interview 3 for
only one Guo of among was Standing China, seventeen political After cut interview of authority Politburo members the to minutes Wengui the hour off, and corruption of after highest own Committee of broadcasting. China, the alleged abruptly the of evidence
Politburo and the Standing a leader of allegations Committee of the Zhenhua Fu anti-graft and latter member massive the Qishan, Wang movement. being involved Guo's the
that allegations". Beijing interview "unsubstantiated warned reported his VOA's Guo representatives It was to not for
Inspector into on General members conduct August Office U.S. investigation to this an of requested the 27, interruption the 2017. Congress Four of
Maryland, investigation with rather an television was pressure on award-winning College reporter, concluded instructions Chinese the than journalistic Mark of Chair experiences at any leadership’s as best of Guo Broadcast solely interview "The of Park the a curtail The comply the to interview broadcast industry decision during from University and that "was a Guo failure the that Feldstein, to investigative OIG and government.Another professionalism journalistic based of standards. by decades the Journalism violation concluded practices unprecedented investigation, journalist colossal and with
loyalty employer apparently report to the negligent authenticity concluded. to the "demonstrated of violation of in said journalistic other " its pre-interview "There report failure source been approach" Feldstein and of its expense The evidence — at vetting standards or The greater "corroborate and that fairness," the verification, interview interview to accuracy, standards. also grossly Guo’s to team of basic a sources" had than industry
Cold during War the first when its The and its as influence well. VOA is started operations that started
against the Foy during War, its director VOA purpose, the VOA believed that the of in aiding fight he strongly was Kohler, which communism. the serving as Cold identified
positive was listeners indication in regular were He listeners regular and such 194,000 impact. getting the they listeners argued an of Sweden, as million 2.1 numbers in that a of France,
received As schedules. world, that over requests noted he of hundreds listeners for 30,000 the broadcasting month letters a the all VOA from further and thousands of evidence,
in and was 1952 There while letters of done those some an was director. 1953 analysis sent still Kohler of
found that be could persuasion. The actionable writing indicator letter successful, study of an
found different different broadcasts effects. also countries that It was having were in
listeners In and country, by regular one American adopted broadcast. practiced values the presented
types programs was of also different tended a Age no the audiences like to factor: and country. older matter younger
evidence used and grow all strengthen free Kohler the the to VOA helped this world. of that to as claim
in the countries Italy key and such world, also condemn major of decline in actions communist France. a communism as Korea, It the influenced UN "free including and in to in the their decision factor was
the bring Americanize. VOA the not to caused Italy, did but communism, it end just country to an In
behind the The Curtain. Iron also an impact had VOA
helped defectors their the all in defect. decision during to VOA Kohler's Practically claimed time
Another the of response. was impact, according to Soviet indication Kohler,
Kohler the was an having VOA impact. argued because soviets that the responded
as effective the practice most that be ones curtain, behind on labor, outside as lives can slave were iron in Marxism. the the and Based it Soviet well programs that questions of and of errors lies Stalin’s presumed responses, on compared version the those of
Radio, Pakistan. VOA, airs in DEEWA of the
a American positive some the program listeners claim Although effect. an promoting that experiencing are others be suspicious is to agenda,
a leading of to Some sense are voiceless, that giving voice to programs them feel the listeners the a empowerment.
to a in Kurds the Iran negative Kurdish has on according and publication, had Kurdistan VOA's service impact Life.
the and that the has VOA conflict Talabani between the They exacerbated Barzani. claim the
that extremist further mosques. covering the They and VOA building wrongful arrests, wrongful is up the imprisonments, claim of
generation According VOA. are being new is a the into terrorists fanatics, forming turned because of and to same of the publication, Kurds
VOA doing They to claim the help is this PUK.
the to VOA suggest listen that service wants. but not people Latin being is to way the the in There are who the influenced, American evidence
of life, and adopting of way beliefs understanding and with the are listeners parroting lives. their do values American not Instead that mesh
the that However, others of negative think have is a they adopted propaganda. VOA because America, view
Chinese students study done on was A in America.
Chinese through It the the of actions disapproved that the they VOA, of found government.
VOA America, found on had Chinese done study that an political beliefs. on in and effect the Another their scholars was
on Their to relation tend not believe did China. did though, in to not reports the as beliefs VOA's change China, they political
BBC VOA Russia media Frank Service Voice Kao Europe/Radio TV Propaganda Shozo the of Conover Welle Willis International Free State Telesur World Radio Free United Asia Baba broadcasting people Radio Liberty France VOA George Deutsche Indonesia States Rebelde Today 24 Hausa in America Alhurra Radio
website Official
