Sosie Ruth Bacon (born March 15, 1992) is an American actress. Her first role was playing 10-year-old Emily in the movie Loverboy (2005), which was directed by her father, Kevin Bacon. James Duff, producer of The Closer, was compelled by Bacon's performance in Loverboy to suggest that she play the role of Deputy Chief Brenda Leigh Johnson's niece Charlie in the fifth season of the show. Although her parents were opposed to her being involved in acting, Bacon accepted the role and appeared in four episodes alongside her mother, who played the role of Chief Johnson. Bacon portrayed the character Skye Miller in the TV series 13 Reasons Why.


== Early life ==
Sosie Bacon was born on March 15, 1992, to married actors Kevin Bacon and Kyra Sedgwick. Sedgwick gave birth shortly after filming Miss Rose White, and named her newborn after the movie's art director, Sosie Hublitz. Despite her parents' successful acting careers, Bacon was provided with a "fairly ordinary" upbringing, according to producer James Duff, and her parents were determined that she not follow them into acting. During the filming of The Closer, Bacon's mother would spend half of the year in Los Angeles, while Bacon would stay in Manhattan with her father and brother. Sedgwick credited this as leading to a closer bond between Bacon and her father.


== Career ==
While directing Loverboy, Kevin Bacon decided to cast his daughter Sosie in the film. Asked about the choice to cast his daughter, Kevin said he made the decision as a director, not as a father, because he believed his daughter was perfect for the role, and "Sosie was cool. She kind of got it out of her system. She said 'Oh, that was fun—now I’m going back to school'." Sosie portrayed the main character Emily in a flashback, while the adult Emily was portrayed by Sosie's mother Kyra Sedgwick. As Emily, Sosie sang an a cappella version of the David Bowie song "Life on Mars?", that was described in a review from The New York Times as "grotesquely funny". Her brother, Travis Bacon, was cast in a smaller role in the film. Kevin praised Sosie's work on Loverboy, but said he would not be encouraging her to pursue acting further.Her performance in Loverboy is what James Duff, the producer of The Closer, has said first prompted him to suggest that Bacon begin acting. Duff had wanted to write her into the series since she was 12 years old, according to Sedgwick, who plays the role of Deputy Chief Brenda Leigh Johnson on the show. However, Sedgwick was opposed to the idea, insistent on Sosie's not getting involved with acting. Eventually, Duff says, he was able to get Sosie's parents to agree to her having a brief role on the series provided it did not interfere with her education. He described the agreement as being "more like a treaty negotiation" than an arrangement.Sedgwick's version of events was different. She said she had told Duff she would discuss it with her husband, but that Duff went directly to Sosie, who accepted the role, and at that point, her mother said, "there was no turning back".On the show, Sosie portrayed Charlie, who is left in the care of her aunt (Johnson) and her husband, Special Agent Fritz Howard. The role lasted for four episodes and led to what Sedgwick has said was one of the hardest scenes for her on the show, where Brenda is telling Charlie that she has to go home, and Charlie responding by asking, "Do you not want me to stay?" Sedgwick has said she would not find it unusual if Duff offered Bacon a more regular role on Major Crimes, a spin-off of The Closer series.Following her role on The Closer, Sosie began studying at Brown University and has studied at musical theatre company CAP21. She joined the cast of Fiction in Photographs in 2012, an off-Broadway musical by Dan Mills and Randy Redd.On November 21, 2013, Sosie was crowned Miss Golden Globe 2014. Chosen each year by the Hollywood Foreign Press Association, Miss Golden Globe assists with the Globe's ceremony and is typically the daughter of Hollywood celebrities. The outgoing recipient was Francesca Eastwood, the daughter of Clint Eastwood and Frances Fisher.Sosie was cast in the leading female role of the independent film Off Season (2014), opposite Chance Kelly. Following up her role in 13 Reasons Why, Bacon was cast in Here and Now, a 2018-debuting HBO family drama series from award-winning writer-producer Alan Ball, as Kristen, the youngest daughter of a couple played by Tim Robbins and Holly Hunter.


== Filmography ==


=== Film ===


=== Television ===


== References ==


== External links ==
Sosie Bacon on IMDb